Unit V
Chapter 12
En
vir
onmental P
ollution
Envir
vironmental
Pollution
Environmental pollution results from ‘the
release of substances and energy from waste
products of human activities. There are many
types of pollution. They are classified on the
basis of medium through which pollutants are
transported and diffused. Pollution can be
classified into (i) air pollution, (ii) water
pollution, (iii) land pollution and (iv) noise
pollution.
Water Pollution
GEOGRAPHICAL
PERSPECTIVE ON
SELECTED ISSUES
AND PROBLEMS
Indiscriminate use of water by increasing
population and industrial expansion has led
degradation of the quality of water considerably.
Surface water available from rivers, canals,
lakes, etc. is never pure. It contains small
quantities of suspended particles, organic and
inorganic substances. When concentration of
these substances increases, the water becomes
polluted, and hence becomes unfit for use. In
such a situation, the self-purifying capacity of
water is unable to purify the water.
Fig.12.1 : Cutting Through Effluent : Rowing
through a pervasive layer of foam on the heavily
polluted Yamuna on the outskirts of New Delhi
Though water pollutants are also created
from natural sources (erosion, landslides,
decay and decomposition of plants and
animals, etc.) pollutants from human sources
are the real causes of concern. Human beings
pollute the water through industrial,
agricultural and cultural activities. Among
these activities, industry is the most significant
contributor.
2015-16Table 12.1 : Types and Sources of Pollution
Pollution Types
Pollution Involved
Sources of Pollution
Air Pollution Oxides of sulphur (SO 2 , SO 3 ), Oxides of
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, hydro-carbon,
ammonia, lead, aldehydes asbestos and beryllium. Combustion of coal, petrol and diesel,
industrial processes, solid waste disposal,
sewage disposal, etc.
Water Pollution Odour, dissolved and suspended solids,
ammonia and urea, nitrate and nitrites,
chloride, fluoride, carbonates, oil and grease,
insecticide and pesticide residue, tannin,
coliform MPM (bacterial count) sulphates and
sulphides, heavy metals e.g. lead, aresenic,
mercury, manganese, etc., radioactive
substances. Sewage disposal, urban run-off, toxic
effluents from industries, run-off over
cultivated lands and nuclear power plants.
Land Pollution Human and animal excreta viruses and
bacteria, garbage and vectors therein,
pesticides and fertiliser-residue alkalinity,
fluorides, radio-active substances. Improper human activities, disposal of
untreated industrial waste, use of pesticides
and fertilisers.
Noise Pollution High level of noise above tolerance level. Aircrafts, automobiles, trains, industrial
processing and advertising media.
Industries produce several undesirable
products including industrial wastes, polluted
waste water, poisonous gases, chemical
residuals, numerous heavy metals, dust,
smoke, etc. Most of the industrial wastes are
disposed off in running water or lakes.
Consequently, poisonous elements reach the
reservoirs, rivers and other water bodies, which
destroy the bio-system of these waters. Major
water polluting industries are leather, pulp and
paper, textiles and chemicals.
Various types of chemicals used in modern
agriculture such as inorganic fertilisers,
pesticides and herbicides are also pollution
generating components. These chemicals are
washed down to rivers, lakes and tanks. These
chemicals also infiltrate the soil to reach the
ground water. Fertiliser induces an increase in
the nitrate content of surface waters. Cultural
activities such as pilgrimage, religious fairs,
tourism, etc. also cause water pollution. In
India, almost all surface water sources are
Table 12.2 : Sources of Pollution in the Ganga and the Yamuna Rivers
River and State
Polluted Stretches
Nature of Pollution
Main Polluters
Ganga
(Uttar Pradesh)
Bihar
and
West Bengal (a) Downstream of Kanpur 1. Industrial pollution from
(b) Downstream of Varanasi
towns like Kanpur
(c) Farrakka Barrage
2. Domestic wastes from
urban centres
3. Dumping of carcasses in
the river
Yamuna
(Delhi)
and
(Uttar Pradesh) (a) Delhi to confluence with 1. Extraction of water by Delhi dumping its domestic
Chambal
Haryana and Uttar waste
(b) Mathura and Agra
Pradesh for irrigation
2. Agricultural run off
resulting in high levels of
micro-pollutants in the
Yamuna
3. Domestic and industrial
waste of Delhi flowing
into the river
136
Cities of Kanpur, Allahabad,
Varanasi, Patna and Kolkata
release domestic waste into the
river
India : People and Economy
2015-16contaminated and unfit for human
consumption.
Water pollution is a source of various
water borne diseases. The diseases commonly
caused due to contaminated water are
diarrhoea, intestinal worms, hepatitis, etc. World
Health Organisation shows that about one-
fourth of the communicable diseases in India
are water-borne.
Air Pollution
Air pollution is taken as addition of
contaminants like dust, fumes, gas, fog, odour,
smoke or vapour to the air in substantial
proportion and duration that may be harmful
to flora and fauna and to property. With
increasing use of varieties of fuels as source of
energy, there is a marked increase in emission
of toxic gases into the atmosphere resulting in
the pollution of air. Combustion of fossil fuels,
mining and industries are the main sources of
air pollution. These processes release oxides
of sulphur and nitrogen, hydrocarbons,
carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, lead and
asbestos.
Air pollution causes various diseases
related to respiratory, nervous and circulatory
systems.
Smoky fog over cities called as urban smog
is caused by atmospheric pollution. It proves
very harmful to human health. Air pollution can
also cause acid rains. Rainwater analysis of
urban environment has indicated that pH value
of the first rain after summer is always lower
than the subsequent rains.
Smog in Mumbai
Geographical perspective on selected issues and problems
137
2015-16Noise Pollution
Noise pollution refers to the state of unbearable
and uncomfortable to human beings which is
caused by noise from different sources. This
matter has become a serious concern only in
recent years due to a variety of technological
innovations.
The main sources of noise pollution are
various factories, mechanised construction
and demolition works, automobiles and
aircrafts, etc. There may be added periodical
but polluting noise from sirens, loudspeakers
used in various festivals, programmes
associated with community activities. The level
of steady noise is measured by sound level
expressed in terms of decibels (dB).
Of all these sources, the biggest nuisance
is the noise produced by traffic, because its
intensity and nature depend upon such factors
Urban Waste Disposal
Fig. 12.2 : Noise monitoring at Panchpatmalai
Bauxite Mine
as the type of aircraft, vehicle, train and the
condition of road as well as that of vehicle (in
case of automobiles). In sea traffic, the noise
pollution is confined to the harbour due to
loading and unloading activities being carried.
Industries cause noise pollution but with
varying intensity depending upon the type of
industry.
Noise pollution is location specific and its
intensity declines with increase in distance from
the source of pollution, i.e. industrial areas,
arteries of transportation, airport, etc. Noise
pollution is hazardous in many metropolitan
and big cities in India.
138
Urban areas are generally marked by
overcrowding, congestion, inadequate
facilities to support the fast growin g
population and consequent poor sanitary
conditions and foul air. Environmental
pollution by solid wastes has now got
significance because of enormous growth in
the quantity of wastes generated from various
sources. Solid waste refers to a variety of old
and used articles, For example stained small
pieces of metals, broken glasswares, plastic
containers, polythene bags, ashes, floppies,
CDs, etc. dumped at different places. These
discarded materials are also termed as
refuse, garbage and rubbish, etc. and are
disposed of from two sources : (i) household
or domestic establishments, and (ii)
industrial or commercial establishments. The
household wastes is disposed off either on
public lands or on private contractors’ sites,
whereas the solid wastes of industrial units
India : People and Economy
2015-16are collected and disposed off through public
(municipal) facilities at low lying public
grounds (landfill areas). The huge turn out
of ashes and debris from industries, thermal
power houses and building constructions or
demolitions have posed problems of serious
consequences. Solid wastes cause health
hazard through creation of obnoxious smell,
and harbouring of flies and rodents, which
act as carriers of diseases like typhoid,
diphtheria, diarrhoea, malaria and cholera,
etc. These wastes cause frequent nuisance
as and when these are carelessly handled,
spread by wind and splittered through rain
water.
Concentration of industrial units in and
around urban centres gives rise to disposal
of industrial wastes. The dumping of
industrial waste into rivers leads to water
pollution. River pollution from city-based
industries and untreated sewage leads to
serious health problems downstream.
Urban waste disposal is a serious
problem in India. In metropolitan cities like
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, etc.,
about 90 per cent of the solid waste is
collected and disposed. But in most of other
cities and towns in the country, about 30
Case Study : A Role Model to Restore the Ecology and Safeguard
Human Health in Daurala
Based on the universal law “Polluter pays”, effort to restore the ecology and safeguard the human health with
people’s participation has taken place in Daurala near Meerut. These efforts are now bearing fruits after a
span of three years when Meerut based NGO had developed a model for ecological restoration. The meeting
of the Daurala Industries officials, NGOs, Government officials and other stakeholders at Meerut has brought
out results. The powerful logics, authentic studies and the pressure of people have brought a new lease of life
to the twelve thousand residents of this village. It was in the year 2003 that the pitiable condition of Dauralaites
drew the attention of the civil society. The groundwater of this village was contaminated with heavy metals.
The reason was that the untreated wastewater of Daurala industries was leaching to the groundwater table.
The NGO conducted a door to door survey of the health status of the residents and came out with a report.
The organisation, the village community and people’s representatives sat together to find out sustainable
solutions to the health problem. The industrialists showed a keen interest towards checking the deteriorating
ecology. The overhead water tank’s capacity in the village was enhanced and a 900m extra pipeline was laid
to supply potable water to the community. The silted pond of the village was cleaned and recharged by
desilting it. Large quantity of silt was removed paving way to large quantity of water so that it recharged the
aquifers. Rainwater harvesting structures have been constructed at different places which has helped in
diluting the contaminants of the groundwater after the monsoons. 1000 trees have also been planted which
have improved the environment.
Geographical perspective on selected issues and problems
139
2015-16to 50 per cent of the waste generated are
left uncollected which accumulate on
streets, in open spaces between houses and
in wastelands leading to serious health
hazards. These wastes should be treated as
resource and utilised for generating energy
and compost. Untreated wastes ferment
slowly and release toxic biogas to the
atmosphere, including methane.
What do we throw away? Why?
Where does our waste end up?
Why do ragpickers sort out rubbish dumps? Does it
have some value?
Is our urban waste worth anything?
Fig. 12.3 : A view of urban waste in Mahim, Mumbai
Rural-Urban Migration
Population flow from rural to urban areas is
caused by many factors like high demand for
labour in urban areas, low job opportunities
in rural areas and unbalanced pattern of
development between urban and rural areas.
In India population in cities is rapidly
increasing. Due to low opportunities in smaller
and medium cities, the poor people generally
bypass these small cities and directly come to
the mega cities for their livelihood.
A case study given below to have better
understanding of the subject. Read it carefully
and try to comprehend the process of rural
urban migration.
A Case Study
Ramesh has been working in contract as a
welder on construction site in Talcher (coal
region of Orissa) for the last two years. He
moved with the contractor to various places
like Surat, Mumbai, Gandhi Nagar, Bharuch,
Jamnagar and so on. He remits Rs. 20,000 per
year to his father in his native village. The
remittances have been mainly used for daily
consumption, health care, schooling of
children, etc. Part of the money is also used in
agriculture, purchasing of land and building
of houses, etc. The standard of living of
Ramesh’s family improved significantly.
Fifteen years ago, the situation was not the
same. The family was passing through very
At present, 47 per cent of the world’s six billion population lives in cities and more will join them in
near future. This proportion is estimated to go up to 50 per cent by 2008. That will put pressure on
governments to make urban areas better places to live with optimum infrastructure facilities for
desirable quality of life.
By 2050, an estimated two-thirds of the world’s population will live in urban areas, imposing even
more pressure on the space infrastructure and resources of cities, which are manifested in terms of
sanitary, health, crime problems and urban poverty.
Urban population grows as a result of natural increase (when birth rate exceeds death rate), net in-
migration (when people move in than out), and sometimes reclassification of urban areas to encompass
formerly rural population settlements. In India, it is estimated that after 1961 around 60 per cent of the
urban growth has been attributed and 29 per cent of them from rural areas to urban migration.
140
India : People and Economy
2015-16tough times. Three of his brothers and their
families had to survive on three acres of land.
The family was highly in debt. Ramesh had to
discontinue his studies after ninth standard. He
was further hard pressed when he got married.
Simultaneously, he was also impressed by
some successful out-migrants of his village who
had been working in Ludhiana and supporting
their families in village by sending money and
some consumer goods. Thus, due to abject
poverty in the family and perceived job promises
at Ludhiana, he made a move to Punjab with
his friend. He worked there in a woolen factory
for six months at the rate of only Rs. 20 per day
in 1988. Apart from the crisis of managing his
personal expenditure from this meagre income,
he was also facing difficulty in assimilation to
the new culture and environment. Then he
decided to change his place of work from
Ludhiana to Surat under the guidance of his
friend. He learnt the skills of welding in Surat
and after that he has been moving to different
places with the same contractor. Though the
economic condition of Ramesh‘s family at village
improved, he is bearing the pain of separation
of his near and dear ones. He cannot shift them
with him, as the job is temporary and
transferable.
Comments
In developing countries, poor, semi-illiterate and
the unskilled like Ramesh migrating from rural
areas frequently end up performing menial jobs
at low wages in informal sector in urban areas.
Since wages are very low to support the family
at the place of destination, the spouses are left
behind in rural areas to look after children and
elderly people. Thus, the rural-urban migration
stream is dominated by the males.
Pr
ob
lems of Slums
Prob
oblems
The concept “Urban or Urban Centre” is defined
in settlement geography to differentiate it from
Have you visited a slum?
Visit a slum in your city, and
write about the problems
faced by slum dwellers.
Geographical perspective on selected issues and problems
141
2015-16Dharavi–Asia’s Largest Slum
“.... Buses merely skirt the periphery. Autorickshaws cannot go
there, Dharavi is part of central Bombay where three wheelers are
banned.
Only one main road traverses the slum, the miscalled ‘ninety-foot
road’, which has been reduced to less than half of that for most of
its length. Some of the side alleys and lanes are so narrow that not
even a bicycle can pass. The whole neighbourhood consists of temporary buildings, two or three
storeyed high with rusty iron stairways to the upper part, where a single room is rented by a whole
family, sometimes accommodating twelve or more people; it is a kind of tropical version of the
industrial dwelling of Victorian London’s East End.
But Dharavi is a keeper of more sombre secrets than the revulsion it inspires in the rich; a revulsion,
moreover, that is, in direct proportion to the role it serves in the creation of the wealth of Bombay. In
this place of shadowless, treeless sunlight, uncollected garbage, stagnant pools of foul water, where
the only non-human creatures are the shining black crows and long grey rats, some of the most
beautiful, valuable and useful articles in India are made. From Dharavi come delicate ceramics and
pottery, exquisite embroidery and zari work, sophisticated leather goods, high-fashion garments,
finely-wrought metalwork, delicate jewellery settings, wood carvings and furniture that would find its
way into the richest houses, both in India and abroad...
Dharavi was an arm of the sea, that was filled by waste, largely produced by the people who have
come to live there: Scheduled Castes and poor Muslims. It comprises rambling buildings of corrugated
metal, 20 metres high in places, used for the treatment of hides and tanning. There are pleasant
parts, but rotting garbage is everywhere...”
(Seabrook, 1996, pp. 50, 51-52)
the “Rural” about which you have learnt in
some previous chapters of this book. You have
also learnt in the book entitled “Fundamentals
of Human Geography” that this concept is
defined differently in different countries.
Both urban and rural settlements are
different in their functions, sometimes,
142
complementing each other. Apart from these, rural
and urban areas have also emerged into two
separate cultural, social, political, economic and
technological divide.
India, which has a predominance of rural
population (approximately 69 per cent of the
total population in 2011) and where villages
India : People and Economy
2015-16were considered the ideal republics by
Mahatma Gandhi, most of the rural areas are
still poor performing primary activities. Here
most of the villages exist as appendix to the core
urban centre forming its hinterland.
This may give an impression that urban
centres exist as undifferentiated homogeneous
entities in opposition to the rural areas. On the
contrary, urban centres in India are more
differentiated in terms of the socio-economic,
politico-cultural and other indicators of
development than any other areas. At the top,
there are farm houses and high income group
localities characterised by well-developed
urban infrastructures like wide roads, street
lights, water and sanitation facilities, lawns,
well-developed green belt, parks, play grounds
and provisions for individual security and right
to privacy. At the other extreme of it are the
“slums”, jhuggi-jhopari” clusters and colonies
of shanty structures. These are inhabited by
those people who were forced to migrate from
the rural areas to these urban centres in search
of livelihood but could not afford proper
housing due to high rent and high costs
of land. They occupy environmentally
incompatible and degraded areas.
Slums are residential areas of the least
choice, dillapidated houses, poor hygienic
conditions, poor ventilation, lack of basic
amenities like drinking water, light and toilet
facilities, etc. These areas are overcrowded
having narrow street pattern prone to serious
hazards from fire. Moreover, most of the slum
population works in low paid, high risk-prone,
unorganised sectors of the urban economy.
Consequently, they are the undernourished,
prone to different types of diseases and illness
and can ill afford to give proper education to
their children. The poverty makes them
vulnerable to drug abuse, alcoholism, crime,
vandalism, escapism, apathy and ultimately
social exclusion.
Land Degradation
The pressure on agricultural land increases not
only due to the limited availability but also by
deterioration of quality of agricultural land. Soil
erosion, water-logging, salinisation and
alkalinisation of land lead to land degradation.
What happens if land is consistently used
without managing its fertility? Land is degraded
and productivity declines. Land degradation is
generally understood either as a temporary or
a permanent decline in productive capacity of
the land.
Though all degraded land may not be
wasteland, but unchecked process of degradation
may lead to the conversion to wasteland.
There are two processes that induce land
degradation. These are natural and created by
human beings. National Remote Sensing Centre
(NRSC) has classified wastelands by using
remote sensing techniques and it is possible to
categorise these wastelands according to the
processes that have created them. There are a
few types of wastelands such as gullied /ravinous
land, desertic or coastal sands, barren rocky
areas, steep sloping land, and glacial areas,
which are primarily caused by natural agents.
There are other types of degraded lands such as
waterlogged and marshy areas, land affected by
Using information provided in Table 12.3, make a pie-
chart showing cultivable wastelands caused by different
processes.
Table 12.3 : Classification of Wasteland by
Processes in India
Categories
Total Wasteland
Barren & Uncultivable Wasteland
Natural Degraded CWL
Why are the children of slum-dwellers
deprived of school education?
% of
Geographical
Area
17.98
2.18
2.4
Natural and Man-Made Degraded CWL 7.51
Man-Made Degraded CWL 5.88
Total Degraded CWL 15.8
Source: Calculated from NRSA Wasteland Atlas, 2000
Geographical perspective on selected issues and problems
143
2015-16salinity and alkalinity and land with or without
scrub, which have largely been caused by
natural as well as human factors. There are some
other types of wastelands such as degraded
shifting cultivation area, degraded land under
plantation crops, degraded forests, degraded
pastures, and mining and industrial wastelands,
are caused by human action. Table 12.3
indicates that wastelands caused by man-made
processes are more important than natural
processes.
Jhabua district is located in the westernmost
agro-climatic zone in Madhya Pradesh. It is, in
fact, one of the five most backward districts of
the country. It is characterised by high
concentration of tribal population (mostly
Bhils). The people suffer due to poverty which
has been accentuated by the high rate of
resource degradation, both forest and land. The
watershed management programmes funded
by both the ministries of “Rural Development”
and “Agriculture”, Government of India, have
been successfully implemented in Jhabua
district which has gone a long way in preventing
land degradation and improving soil quality.
Watershed Management Programmes
acknowledge the linkage between land, water
and vegetation and attempts to improve
livelihoods of people through natural resource
management and community participation. In
the past five years, the programmes funded by
the Ministry of Rural Development alone (implemented by Rajiv Gandhi Mission for
Watershed Management) has treated 20 per
cent of the total area under Jhabua district.
The Petlawad block of Jhabua is located in
the northernmost part of the district and
represents an interesting and successful case of
Government-NGO partnership and community
participation in managing watershed
programmes. The Bhils in Petlawad block, for
example, (Sat Rundi hamlet of Karravat village)
through their own efforts, have revitalised large
parts of common property resources. Each
household planted and maintained one tree on
the common property. They also have planted
fodder grass on the pasture land and adopted
social-fencing of these lands for at least two
years. Even after that, they say, there would be
no open grazing on these lands, but stall feeding
of cattle, and they are thus confident that the
pastures they have developed would sustain
their cattle in future.
An interesting aspect of this experience is
that before the community embarked upon the
process of management of the pasture, there
was encroachment on this land by a villager
from an adjoining village. The villagers called
the tehsildar to ascertain the rights of the
common land. The ensuing conflict was tackled
by the villagers by offering to make the defaulter
encroaching on the CPR a member of their user
group and sharing the benefits of greening the
common lands/pastures. (See the section on
CPR in chapter “Land Resources and
Agriculture).
Fig. 12.4 : Trees planted on Common Property
Resources in Jhabua
Source: Evaluation Report, Rajiv Gandhi Mission for
Watershed Management, Government of Madhya
Pradesh, 2002 Fig. 12.5 : Co mmunity Participation for Land
Leveling in Common Property Resources in
Jhabua (ASA, 2004)
A Case Study
144
India : People and Economy
2015-16EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the following from the given options.
(i)
Which one of the following river is highly polluted?
(a) Brahmaputra
(c)
Yamuna
(ii)
(iii)
(b) Satluj
(d) Godavari
Which one of the following deseases is caused by water pollution?
(a) Conjunctivitis
(c)
Respiratory infections
(b) Diarrhorea
(d) Bronchitis
Which one of the following is the cause of acid rain?
(a)
(b)
(iv)
2.
Water pollution
Land pollution
(c)
(d)
Push and pull factors are responsible for–
(a) Migration
(c)
(b) Land degradation
(d)
Noise pollution
Air pollution
Slums
Air pollution
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
What is the difference between pollution and pollutants?
(ii)
(iii)
Describe the major source of air pollution.
Mention major problems associated with urban waste disposal in India.
(iv)
What are the effects of air pollution on human health.
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)
Describe the nature of water pollution in India.
(ii)
(iii)
Describe the problem of slums in India.
Suggest measures for reduction of land degradation.
Geographical perspective on selected issues and problems
145
2015-16
