Unit III
Chapter 7
MINERAL AND
ENERGY
RESOURCES
India is endowed with a rich variety of mineral
resources due to its varied geological structure.
Bulk of the valuable minerals are products of
pre-palaezoic age (Refer: Chapter 2 of Class XI,
Textbook: “Fundamentals of Physical
Geography” and are mainly associated with
metamorphic and igneous rocks of the
peninsular India. The vast alluvial plain tract
of north India is devoid of minerals of economic
use. The mineral resources provide the country
with the necessary base for industrial
development. In this chapter, we shall discuss
the availability of various types of mineral and
energy resources in the country.
A mineral is a natural substance of organic
or inorganic origin with definite chemical and
physical properties.
T ypes of Miner
al R
esour
ces
Mineral
Resour
esources
On the basis of chemical and physical
properties, minerals may be grouped under two
main categories of metallics and non-metallics
which may further be classified as follows :
Fig. 7.1 : Classification of Minerals
2015-16As, it is clear from the Fig. 7.1 metallic
minerals are the sources of metals. Iron ore,
copper, gold produce metal and are included
in this category. Metallic minerals are further
divided into ferrous and non-ferrous metallic
minerals. Ferrous, as you know, refers to iron.
All those minerals which have iron content are
ferrous such as iron ore itself and those which
do not have iron content are non-ferrous such
as copper, bauxite, etc.
Non-metallic minerals are either organic
in origin such as fossil fuels also known as mineral
fuels which are derived from the buried animal
and plant life such as coal and petroleum. Other
type of non-metallic minerals are inorganic in
origin such as mica, limestone and graphite, etc.
Minerals have certain characteristics. These
are unevenly distributed over space. There is
inverse relationship in quality and quantity of
minerals i.e. good quality minerals are less in
quantity as compared to low quality minerals.
The third main characteristic is that all minerals
are exhaustible over time. These take long to
develop geologically and they cannot be
replenished immediately at the time of need.
Thus, they have to be conserved and not
misused as they do not have the second crop.
crystalline rocks. Over 97 per cent of coal
reserves occur in the valleys of Damodar, Sone,
Mahanadi and Godavari. Petroleum reserves
are located in the sedimentary basins of Assam,
Gujarat and Mumbai High i.e. off-shore region
in the Arabian Sea. New reserves have been
located in the Krishna-Godavari and Kaveri
basins. Most of the major mineral resources
occur to the east of a line linking Mangaluru
and Kanpur.
Minerals are generally concentrated in
three broad belts in India. There may be some
sporadic occurrences here and there in isolated
pockets. These belts are :
The North-Eastern Plateau Region
This belt covers Chhotanagpur (Jharkhand),
Odisha Plateau, West Bengal and parts of
Chhattisgarh. Have you ever thought about the
reason of major iron and steel industry being
located in this region? It has variety of minerals
viz. iron ore coal, manganese, bauxite, mica.
Find out the specific region where these
minerals are being extracted.
The South-Western Plateau Region
Agencies involved in the
exploration of minerals
In India, systematic surveying, prospecting
and exploration for minerals is undertaken
by the Geological Survey of India (GSI), Oil
and Natural Gas Commission (ONGC),
Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.
(MECL), National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC), Indian Bureau of Mines
(IBM), Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (BGML),
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL), National
Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) and the
Departments of Mining and Geology in
various states.
Distribution of Minerals in India
Most of the metallic minerals in India occur in
the peninsular plateau region in the old
This belt extends over Karnataka, Goa and
contiguous Tamil Nadu uplands and Kerala.
This belt is rich in ferrous metals and bauxite.
It also contains high grade iron ore, manganese
and limestone. This belt packs in coal deposits
except Neyveli lignite.
This belt does not have as diversified
mineral deposits as the north-eastern belt.
Kerala has deposits of monazite and thorium,
bauxite clay. Goa has iron ore deposits.
The North-Western Region
This belt extends along Aravali in Rajasthan and
part of Gujarat and minerals are associated with
Dharwar system of rocks. Copper, zinc have
been major minerals. Rajasthan is rich in
building stones i.e. sandstone, granite, marble.
Gypsum and Fuller’s earth deposits are also
extensive. Dolomite and limestone provide raw
materials for cement industry. Gujarat is known
Mineral and Energy Resources
73
2015-16for its petroleum deposits. You may be knowing
that Gujarat and Rajasthan both have rich
sources of salt.
Why and where Dandi March was
organised by Mahatma Gandhi?
The Himalayan belt is another mineral belt
where copper, lead, zinc, cobalt and tungsten
are known to occur. They occur on both the
eastern and western parts. Assam valley has
mineral oil deposits. Besides oil resources are
also found in off-shore-areas near Mumbai
Coast (Mumbai High).
In the following pages you will find the
spatial pattern of some of the important
minerals.
Ferrous Mineral
Ferrous minerals such as iron ore, manganese,
chromite, etc., provide a strong base for the
development of metallurgical industries. Our
country is well-placed in respect of ferrous
minerals both in reserves and production.
Iron Ore
India is endowed with fairly abundant
resources of iron ore. It has the largest reserve
of iron ore in Asia. The two main types of ore
found in our country are haematite and
magnetite. It has great demand in international
market due to its superior quality. The iron ore
mines occur in close proximity to the coal fields
in the north-eastern plateau region of the
country which adds to their advantage.
The total reserves of iron ore in the country
were about 20 billion tonnes in the year 2004-
05. About 95 per cent of total reserves of iron
ore is located in the States of Odisha,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Goa,
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
In Odisha, iron ore occurs in a series of hill
ranges in Sundergarh, Mayurbhanj and Jhar.
The important mines are Gurumahisani,
Sulaipet, Badampahar (Mayurbhaj), Kiruburu
(Kendujhar) and Bonai (Sundergarh). Similar
hill ranges, Jharkhand has some of the oldest
iron ore mines and most of the iron and steel
74
Can you find out its reason?
plants are located around them. Most of the
important mines such as Noamundi and Gua
are located in Poorbi and Pashchimi
Singhbhum districts. This belt further extends
to Durg, Dantewara and Bailadila. Dalli, and
Rajhara in Durg are the important mines of
iron ore in the country. In Karnataka, iron ore
deposits occur in Sandur-Hospet area of
B allari district, Baba Budan hills and
Kudremukh in Chikkamagaluru district and
parts of Shivamogga, Chitradurg and
Tumakuru districts. The districts of
Chandrapur, Bhandara and Ratnagiri in
Maharashtra, Karimnagar and Warangal
district of Telangana, Kurnool, Cuddapah and
Anantapur districts of Andhra Pradesh, Salem
and Nilgiris districts of Tamil Nadu are other
iron mining regions. Goa has also emerged as
an important producer of iron ore.
Manganese
Manganese is an important raw material for
smelting of iron ore and also used for
manufacturing ferro alloys. Manganese
deposits are found in almost all geological
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 7.2 : India – Metallic Minerals (Ferrous)
Mineral and Energy Resources
75
2015-16formations, however, it is mainly associated with
Dharwar system.
Odisha is the leading producer of
Manganese. Major mines in Odisha are located
in the central part of the iron ore belt of India,
particularly in Bonai, Kendujhar, Sundergarh,
Gangpur, Koraput, Kalahandi and Bolangir.
Karnataka is another major producer and
here the mines are located in Dharwar, Ballari,
Belagavi, North Canara, Chikkmagaluru,
Shivamogga, Chitradurg and Tumkur.
Maharashtra is also an important producer of
manganese which is mined in Nagpur,
Bhandara and Ratnagiri districts. The
disadvantage to these mines is that they are
located far from steel plants. The manganese
belt of Madhya Pradesh extends in a belt in
Balaghat-Chhindwara-Nimar-Mandla and
Jhabua districts.
Telangana, Goa, and Jharkhand are other
minor producers of manganese.
Non-Ferrous Minerals
India is poorly endowed with non-ferrous
metallic minerals except bauxite.
Bauxite
Bauxite is the ore which is used in
manufacturing of aluminium. Bauxite is found
mainly in tertiary deposits and is associated
with laterite rocks occurring extensively either
on the plateau or hill ranges of peninsular India
and also in the coastal tracts of the country.
Odisha happens to be the largest producer
of Bauxite. Kalahandi and Sambalpur are the
leading producers. The other two areas which
have been increasing their production are
Bolangir and Koraput. The patlands of
Jharkhand in Lohardaga have rich deposits.
Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra are other major producers.
Bhavanagar, Jamnagar in Gujarat have the major
deposits. Chhattisgarh has bauxite deposits in
Amarkantak plateau while Katni-Jabalpur area
and Balaghat in M.P. have important deposits of
bauxite. Kolaba, Thane, Ratnagiri, Satara, Pune
and Kolhapur in Maharashtra are important
producers. Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Goa are
minor producers of bauxite.
76
Copper
Copper is an indispensable metal in the
electrical industry for making wires, electric
motors, transformers and generators. It is
alloyable, malleable and ductile. It is also mixed
with gold to provide strength to jewellery.
The Copper deposits mainly occur in
Singhbhum district in Jharkhand, Balaghat
district in Madhya Pradesh and Jhunjhunu and
Alwar districts in Rajasthan.
Minor producers of Copper are Agnigundala
in Guntur District (Andhra Pradesh), Chitradurg
and Hasan districts (Karnataka) and South Arcot
district (Tamil Nadu).
Non-metallic Minerals
Among the non-metallic minerals produced in
India, mica is the important one. The other
minerals extracted for local consumption are
limestone, dolomite and phosphate.
Mica
Mica is mainly used in the electrical and
electronic industries. It can be split into very thin
sheets which are tough and flexible. Mica in
India is produced in Jharkhand, Andhra
Pradesh, Telanganga and Rajasthan followed by
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh.
In Jharkhand high quality mica is obtained in a
belt extending over a distance of about 150 km,
in length and about 22 km, in width in lower
Hazaribagh plateau. In Andhra Pradesh. Nellore
district produces the best quality mica. In
Rajasthan mica belt extends for about 320 kms
from Jaipur to Bhilwara and around Udaipur.
Mica deposits also occur in Mysore and Hasan
districts of Karanataka, Coimbatore,
Tiruchirapalli, Madurai and Kanniyakumari in
Tamil Nadu, Alleppey in Kerala, Ratnagiri in
Maharashtra, Purulia and Bankura in West
Bengal.
Energy Resources
Mineral fuels are essential for generation of power,
required by agriculture, industry, transport and
other sectors of the economy. Mineral fuels like
coal, petroleum and natural gas (known as fossil
fuels), nuclear energy minerals, are the
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 7.3 : India – Minerals (Non-Ferrous)
Mineral and Energy Resources
77
2015-16conventional sources of energy. These
conventional sources are exhaustible resources.
Coal
Coal is a one of the important minerals which
is mainly used in the generation of thermal
power and smelting of iron ore. Coal occurs in
rock sequences mainly of two geological ages,
namely Gondwana and tertiary deposits.
About 80 per cent of the coal deposits in
India is of bituminous type and is of non-coking
grade. The most important Gondwana coal
fields of India are located in Damodar Valley.
They lie in Jharkhand-Bengal coal belt and the
important coal fields in this region are Raniganj,
Jharia, Bokaro, Giridih, Karanpura.
Jharia is the largest coal field followed by
Raniganj. The other river valleys associated
with coal are Godavari, Mahanadi and Sone.
The most important coal mining centres are
Singrauli in Madhya Pradesh (part of Singrauli
coal field lies in Uttar Pradesh), Korba in
Chhattisgarh, Talcher and Rampur in Odisha,
Chanda–Wardha, Kamptee and Bander in
Maharashtra and Singareni in Telangana and
Pandur in Andhra Pradesh.
At Singareni, Canaries to miners’ rescue
Singareni collieries, the country’s premier coal production company, still uses canaries to detect the
presence of deadly carbon monoxide in underground mines. Miners collapse and often die even if
small quantities of the highly poisonous CO are present in the air. Though, miners speak lovingly of
the canaries, the underground experience is not at all pleasant for the birds. When lowered into
mines with CO presence, the birds show distress symptoms such as ruffling of feathers, pronounced
chirping and loss of life. These reactions occur even if 0.15 per cent of CO is present in the air. If the
content is 0.3 per cent the bird shows immediate distress and falls off its perch in two to three
minutes. A cage of birds is a good indicator in air containing more than 0.15 per cent CO, said a coal
miner.
The sophisticated hand held CO detectors introduced by the company can detect CO concentrations
from as low as 10 ppm to as high as 1,000 ppm. But despite this, the miners trust the birds, who
have saved the lives of several of their predecessors.
Deccan Chronicle, 26.08.2006
Fig.7.4 : Neyveli Coalfield
78
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 7.5 : India – Conventional Energy Resources
Mineral and Energy Resources
79
2015-16Tertiary coals occur in Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland. It is extracted
from Darangiri, Cherrapunji, Mewlong and
Langrin (Meghalaya); Makum, Jaipur and Nazira
in upper Assam, Namchik – Namphuk (Arunachal
Pradesh) and Kalakot (Jammu and Kashmir).
Besides, the brown coal or lignite occur in
the coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry,
Gujarat and Jammu and Kashmir.
Petroleum
Crude petroleum consists of hydrocarbons of
liquid and gaseous states varying in chemical
composition, colour and specific gravity. It is an
essential source of energy for all internal
combustion engines in automobiles, railways and
aircraft. Its numerous by-products are processed
in petrochemical industries such as fertiliser,
synthetic rubber, synthetic fibre, medicines,
vaseline, lubricants, wax, soap and cosmetics.
Petroleum is referred to as liquid gold
because of its scarcity and diversified uses.
Lunej. Mumbai High which lies 160 km off
Mumbai was discovered in 1973 and
production commenced in 1976. Oil and
natural gas have been found in exploratory
wells in Krishna-Godavari and Kaveri basin
on the east coast.
Oil extracted from the wells is crude oil
and contains many impurities. It cannot be
used directly. It needs to be refined. There are
two types of refineries in India: (a) field based
and (b) market based. Digboi is an example
of field based and Barauni is an example of
market based refinery.
There are 21 refineries in India as on
June 2011 (Fig. 7.6). Identify the States in
which these are located.
Natural Gas
The Gas Authority of India Limited was set
up in 1984 as a public sector undertaking to
transport and market natural gas. It is
obtained alongwith oil in all the oil fields but
exclusive reserves have been located along the
eastern coast as well as (Tamil Nadu, Odisha
and Andhra Pradesh), Tripura, Rajasthan and
off-shore wells in Gujarat and Maharashtra.
Indications of huge gas reserves in Ramanathapuram (Tamil Nadu)
According to a newspaper report (The Hindu, 05.09.2006) the Oil and Natural Gas Commission has
found potential zones of natural gas reserves in Ramanathapuram district. The survey is still in the
initial stages. The exact quantity of gas reserves will be known only after the completion of the
survey. But the results are encouraging.
Crude petroleum occurs in sedimentary
rocks of the tertiary period. Oil exploration
and production was systematically taken up
after the Oil and Natural Gas Commission was
set up in 1956. Till then, the Digboi in Assam
was the only oil producing region but the
scenario has changed after 1956. In recent
years, new oil deposits have been found at the
extreme western and eastern parts of the
country. In Assam, Digboi, Naharkatiya and
Moran are important oil producing areas. The
major oil fields of Gujarat are Ankaleshwar,
Kalol, Mehsana, Nawagam, Kosamba and
80
Non-Conventional Energy Sources
Fossil fuel sources, such as coal, petroleum,
natural gas and nuclear energy use
exhaustible raw materials. Sustainable
energy resources are only the renewable
energy sources like solar, wind, hydro-
geothermal and biomass. These energy
sources are more equitably distributed and
environmental friendly. The non-conventional
energy sources will provide more sustained,
eco-friendly cheaper energy after the initial
cost is taken care of.
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 7.6 : India – Oil Refineries
Mineral and Energy Resources
81
2015-16How are the developed
countries of the world
utilising non-conventional
energy resources? Discuss.
Nuclear Energy Resources
Nuclear energy has emerged as a viable source
in recent times. Important minerals used for the
generation of nuclear energy are uranium and
thorium. Uranium deposits occur in the Dharwar
rocks. Geographically, uranium ores are known
to occur in several locations along the Singbhum
Copper belt. It is also found in Udaipur, Alwar
and Jhunjhunu districts of Rajasthan, Durg
district of Chhattisgarh, Bhandara district of
Maharashtra and Kullu district of Himachal
Pradesh. Thorium is mainly obtained from
monazite and ilmenite in the beach sands along
the coast of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. World’s
richest monazite deposits occur in Palakkad
and Kollam districts of Kerala, near
Vishakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh and
Mahanadi river delta in Odisha.
Atomic Energy Commission was
established in 1948, progress could be made
only after the establishment of the Atomic
Energy Institute at Trombay in 1954 which was
renamed as the Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre in 1967. The important nuclear power
projects are Tarapur (Maharashtra),
82
Rawatbhata near Kota (Rajasthan), Kalpakkam
(Tamil Nadu), Narora (Uttar Pradesh), Kaiga
(Karnataka) and Kakarapara (Gujarat).
Solar Energy
Sun rays tapped in photovoltaic cells can be
converted into energy, known as solar energy.
The two effective processes considered to be
very effective to tap solar energy are
photovoltaics and solar thermal technology.
Solar thermal technology has some relative
advantages over all other non-renewable
energy sources. It is cost competitive,
environment friendly and easy to construct.
Solar energy is 7 per cent more effective than
coal or oil based plants and 10 per cent more
effective than nuclear plants. It is generally
used more in appliances like heaters, crop
dryers, cookers, etc. The western part of India
has greater potential for the development of
solar energy in Gujarat and Rajasthan.
Wind Energy
Wind energy is absolutely pollution free,
inexhaustible source of energy. The mechanism
India : People and Economy
2015-16of energy conversion from blowing wind is
simple. The kinetic energy of wind, through
turbines is converted into electrical energy. The
permanent wind systems such the trade winds,
westerlies and seasonal wind like monsoon have
been used as source of energy. Besides these,
local winds, land and sea breezes can also be
used to produce electricity.
India, already has started generating wind
energy. It has an ambitious programme to install
250 wind-driven turbines with a total capacity
of 45 megawatts, spread over 12 suitable
locations, specially in coastal areas. The Ministry
of Non-conventional Sources of Energy is
developing wind energy in India to lessen the
burden of oil import bill. The country’s potential
of wind power generation exceeds 50,000
megawatts, of which one fourth can be easily
harnessed. In Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra
and Karnataka, favourable conditions for wind
energy exist.
Tidal and Wave Energy
Ocean currents are the store-house of infinite
energy. Since the beginning of seventeenth and
eighteenth century, persistent efforts were made
to create a more efficient energy system from
the ceaseless tidal waves and ocean current.
Large tidal waves are known to occur
along the west coast of India. Hence, India has
great potential for the development of tidal
energy along the coasts but so far these have
not yet been utilised.
Geothermal Energy
When the magma from the interior of earth,
comes out on the surface, tremendous heat is
released. This heat energy can successfully be
tapped and converted to electrical energy. Apart
from this, the hot water that gushes out through
the gyser wells is also used in the generation of
thermal energy. It is popularly known as
Geothermal energy. This energy is now
considered to be one of the key energy sources
which can be developed as an alternate source.
The hot springs and geysers are being used
since medieval period. In India, a geothermal
energy plant has been commissioned at
Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh.
The first successful (1890) attempt to tap
the underground heat was made in the city
of Boise, Idaho (U.S.A.), where a hot water
pipe network was built to give heat to the
surrounding buildings. This plant is still
working.
Bio-energy
Bio-energy refers to energy derived from biological
products which includes agricultural residues,
municipal, industrial and other wastes. Bio-
energy is a potential source of energy conversion.
It can be converted into electrical energy, heat
energy or gas for cooking. It will also process the
waste and garbage and produce energy. This will
improve economic life of rural areas in developing
countries, reduce environmental pollution,
enhance self-reliance and reduce pressure on fuel
wood. One such project converting municipal
waste into energy is Okhla in Delhi.
Conservation of Mineral Resources
The challenge of sustainable development
requires integration of quest for economic
development with environmental concerns.
Traditional methods of resource use result into
generating enormous quantity of waste as well
as create other environmental problems. Hence,
for sustainable development calls for the
protection of resources for the future generations.
There is an urgent need to conserve the resources.
The alternative energy sources like solar power,
wind, wave, geothermal energy are inexhaustible
resource. These should be developed to replace
the exhaustible resources. In case of metallic
minerals, use of scrap metals will enable
recycling of metals. Use of scrap is specially
significant in metals like copper, lead and zinc
in which India’s reserves are meagre. Use of
substitutes for scarce metals may also reduce
their consumption. Export of strategic and scarce
minerals must be reduced, so that the existing
reserve may be used for a longer period.
Mineral and Energy Resources
83
2015-16EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the following from the given options.
(i)
In which one of the following States are the major oil fields located?
(a)
(b)
(ii)
(c)
(d)
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
At which one of the following places was the first atomic power station
started?
(a) Kalpakkam
(c)
Rana Pratap Sagar
(iii) (b) Narora
(d) Tarapur
Which one of the following minerals is known as brown diamond?
(iv) (a) Iron
(c)
Manganese
(b) Lignite
(d) Mica
Which one of the following is non-renewable source of energy?
(a)
(b)
2.
Assam
Bihar
Hydel
Solar
(c)
(d)
Thermal
Wind power
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
Give an account of the distribution of mica in India.
(ii)
What is nuclear power? Mention the important nuclear power stations
in India.
(iii)
Name non-ferrous metal. Discuss their spatial distribution.
(vi)
What are non-conventional sources of energy?
3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)
Write a detailed note on the Petroleum resources of India.
(ii)
84
Write an essay on hydel power in India.
India : People and Economy
2015-16
