Unit III
Chapter 8
We use various items to satisfy our needs.
Agricultural products like wheat, rice, etc. are
to be processed into flour, husked rice before
we consume these. But besides bread and rice,
we also require clothes, books, fans, cars,
medicines, etc. and these are manufactured in
various industries. In modern times industries
have become very important part of an
economy. They provide employment to large
labour force and contribute significantly in the
total national wealth/income.
T ypes of Industries
MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Industries are classified in a number of ways.
On the basis of size, capital investment and
labour force employed, industries are
classified as large, medium, small scale, and
cottage industries. On the basis of ownership,
industries
are
categorised
as
:
(i) public sector, (ii) private sector, and (iii) joint
and cooperative sector, Public sector
enterprises are government/state controlled
companies or corporations funded by
governments. Industries of strategic and
national importance are usually in the public
sector. Industries are also classified on the
basis of the use of their products such as :
(i) basic goods industries, (ii) capital goods
industries (iii) intermediate goods industries,
and (iv) consumer goods industries.
Another method of classifying industries
is on the basis of raw materials used by them.
Accordingly, these can be : (i) agriculture-
based industries, (ii) forest-based industries,
(iii) mineral-based industries, and
(iv) industrially processed raw material-
based industries.
Another common classification of
industries is based on the nature of the
manufactured products. Eight classes of
industries, thus identified are : (1) Metallurgical
Industries, (2) Mechanical Engineering
Industries, (3) Chemical and Allied Industries,
(4) Textile Industries, (5) Food Processing
Industries, (6) Electricity Generation,
(7) Electronics and (8) Communication Industries.
Sometimes, you also read about foot loose
industries. What are these? Have they any
relationship with raw material location or not?
2015-16Location of Industries Market
Can you guess the reasons for the location of
iron and steel industry in eastern and southern
India? Why is there no iron and steel industry
in U.P., Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Gujarat?
Location of industries is influenced by
several factors like access to raw materials,
power, market, capital, transport and labour,
etc. Relative significance of these factors varies
with time and place. There is strong relationship
between raw material and type of industry. It
is economical to locate the manufacturing
industries at a place where cost of production
and delivery cost of manufactured goods to
consumers are the least. Transport costs, to a
great extent, depend on the nature of raw
materials and manufactured products. A brief
description of factors influencing the location
of industries are given below: Markets provide the outlets for manufactured
products. Heavy machine, machine tools, heavy
chemicals are located near the high demand areas
as these are market orientated. Cotton textile
industry uses a non-weight-losing raw material
and is generally located in large urban centre,
e.g. Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Surat, etc. Petroleum
refineries are also located near the markets as the
transport of crude oil is easier and several
products derived from them are used as raw
material in other industries. Koyali, Mathura and
Barauni refineries are typical examples. Ports also
play a crucial role in the location of oil refineries.
Raw Materials
Industries using weight-losing raw materials are
located in the regions where raw materials are
located. Why are the sugar mills in India located
in sugarcane growing areas? Similarly, the
locations of pulp industry, copper smelting and
pig iron industries are located near their raw
materials. In iron and steel industries, iron ore
and coal both are weight-losing raw materials.
Therefore, an optimum location for iron and steel
industries should be near raw material sources.
This is why most of the iron and steel industries
are located either near coalfields (Bokaro,
Durgapur, etc.) or near sources of iron ore
(Bhadravati, Bhilai, and Rourkela). Similarly,
industries based on perishable raw materials are
also located close to raw material sources.
Power
Power provides the motive force for machines,
and therefore, its supply has to be ensured
before the location of any industry. However,
certain industries, like aluminium and
synthetic nitrogen manufacturing industries
tend to be located near sources of power
because they are power intensive and require
huge quantum of electricity.
86
Transport
Have you ever tried to find out the reasons
for the concentration of industries in Mumbai,
Chennai, Delhi and in and around Kolkata?
It was due to the fact that they initially
became the nodal point having transport
links. The industries shifted to interior
locations, only when railway lines were laid.
All major industrial plants are located on the
trunk rail routes.
Labour
Can we think of an industry without labour?
Industries require skilled labour. In India,
labour is quite mobile and is available in large
numbers due to our large population.
Historical Factors
Have you ever thought of the reasons for
emerging Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai as
industrial nodes? These locations were greatly
influenced by our colonial past. During the
initial phase of colonisation, manufacturing
activities received new impetus provided by the
European traders. Places like Murshidabad,
Dhaka, Bhadohi, Surat, Vadodara, Kozhikode,
Coimbatore, Mysuru etc., emerged as important
manufacturing centres. In the subsequent
industrial phase of colonialism, these
manufacturing centres experienced rapid
growth due to competition from the goods
manufactured in Britain and the discriminatory
policies of colonial power.
India : People and Economy
2015-16In the last phase of colonialism, the British
promoted few industries in selected areas. This
led to larger spatial coverage by different types
of industries in the country.
well as mini steel mills. It also includes
secondary producers, rolling mills and
ancillary industries.
Integrated Steel Plants
Industrial Policy
India, being a democratic country aims at
bringing about economic growth with balanced
regional development.
Establishment of iron and steel industry
in Bhilai and Rourkela were based on decision
to develop backward tribal areas of the
country. At present, government of India
provides lots of incentives to industries locating
in backward areas.
Major Industries
The iron and steel industry is basic to the
industrial development of any country. The
cotton textile Industry is one of our traditional
industries. The sugar Industry is based on local
raw materials which prospered even in the
British period. Besides the more recent
petrochemical Industry and the IT industry will
be discussed in this chapter.
The Iron and Steel Industry
The development of the iron and steel industry
opened the doors to rapid industrial
development in India. Almost all sectors of the
Indian industry depend heavily on the iron
and steel industry for their basic
infrastructure. Can we make tools to be used
in agriculture without iron?
The other raw materials besides iron ore
and coking coal, essential for iron and steel
industry are limestone, dolomite, manganese
and fire clay. All these raw materials are gross
(weight losing), therefore, the best location for
the iron and steel plants is near the source of
raw materials. In India, there is a crescent
shaped region comprising parts of
Chhattisgarh, Northern Odisha, Jharkhand and
western West Bengal, which is extremely rich
in high grade iron ore, good quality coking coal
and other supplementing raw materials.
The Indian iron and steel industry
consists of large integrated steel plants as
TISCO
The Tata Iron and Steel plant lies very close to
the Mumbai-Kolkata railway line and about
240 km away from Kolkata, which is the nearest
port for the export of steel. The rivers
Subarnarekha and Kharkai provide water to
the plant. The iron ore for the plant is obtained
from Noamundi and Badam Pahar and coal is
brought from Joda mines in Odisha. Coking coal
comes from Jharia and west Bokaro coalfields.
IISCO
The Indian Iron and Steel Company (IISCO) set
up its first factory at Hirapur and later on
another at Kulti. In 1937, the Steel corporation
of Bengal was constituted in association with
IISCO and set up another iron and steel producing
unit at Burnpur (West Bengal). All the three
plants under IISCO are located very close to
Damodar valley coal fields (Raniganj, Jharia, and
Ramgarh). Iron ore comes from Singhbhum in
Jharkhand. Water is obtained from the Barakar
River, a tributary of the Damodar. All the plants
are located along the Kolkata-Asansol railway
line. Unfortunately, steel production from IISCO
fell considerably in 1972-73 and the plants were
taken over by the government.
Visvesvaraiya Iron and Steel Works Ltd. (VISL)
The third integrated steel plant, the Visvesvaraiya
Iron and Steel Works, initially called the Mysore
Iron and Steel Works, is located close to an iron
ore producing area of Kemangundi in the
Bababudan hills. Limestone and manganese are
also locally available. But this region has no coal.
At the beginning, charcoal obtained by burning
wood from nearby forests was used as fuel till
1951. Afterwards, electric furnaces were installed
which use hydroelectricity from the Jog Falls
hydel power project. The Bhadravati river
supplies water to the plant. This plant produces
specialised steels and alloys.
Manufacturing Industries
87
2015-16Fig. 8.1 : India – Iron and Steel Plants
88
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 8.2
Fig. 8.3
Fig. 8.4
Fig. 8.5
Fig. 8.6
Fig. 8.7
Fig. 8.8
Manufacturing Industries
89
2015-16After independence, during the Second
Five Year Plan (1956-61), three new integrated
steel plants were set up with foreign
collaboration: Rourkela in Odisha, Bhilai in
Chhattisgarh and Durgapur in West Bengal.
These were public sector plants under
Hindustan Steel Limited (HSL). In 1973, the
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) was
created to manage these plants.
Rourkela Steel Plant
The Rourkela Steel plant was set up in 1959 in
the Sundargarh district of Odisha in
collaboration with Germany. The plant was
located on the basis of proximity to raw
materials, thus, minimising the cost of
transporting weight losing raw material. This
plant has a unique locational advantage, as it
receives coal from Jharia (Jharkhand) and iron
ore from Sundargarh and Kendujhar. The
Hirakud project supplies power for the electric
furnaces and water is obtained from the Koel
and Sankh rivers.
Bhilai Steel Plant
The Bhilai Steel Plant was established with
Russian collaboration in Durg District of
Chhattisgarh and started production in 1959.
The iron ore comes from Dalli-Rajhara mine
(Fig. 8.6), coal comes from Korba and Kargali
coal fields. The water comes from the
Tanduladam and the power from the Korba
Themal Power Station. This plant also lies on
the Kolkata-Mumbai railway route. The bulk
of the steel produced goes to the Hindustan
Shipyard at Vishakhapatnam.
Durgapur Steel Plant
Durgapur Steel Plant, in West Bengal, was set
up in collaboration with the government of the
United Kingdom and started production in
1962. This plant lies in Raniganj and Jharia
coal belt and gets iron ore from Noamundi (Fig.
8.7). Durgapur lies on the main Kolkata-Delhi
railway route. Hydel power and water is
90
obtained from the Damodar Valley Corporation
(DVC).
Bokaro Steel Plant
This steel plant was set up in 1964 at Bokaro
with Russian collaboration. This plant was set
up on the principle of transportation cost
minimisation by creating Bokaro-Rourkela
combine. It receives iron ore from the Rourkela
region and the wagons on return take coal to
Rourkela. Other raw materials come to Bokaro
from within a radius of about 350 km. Water
and Hydel power is supplied by the Damodar
Valley Corporation.
Other Steel Plants
New steel plants which were set up in the
Fourth Plan period are away from the main
raw material sources. All the three plants are
located in South India. The Vizag Steel Plant,
in Vishakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh is the
first port based plant which started operating
in 1992. Its port location is of advantage.
The Vijaynagar Steel Plant at Hosapete in
Karnataka was developed using indigenous
technology. This uses local iron ore and
limestone. The Salem Steel Plant in Tamil Nadu
was commissioned in 1982.
Source : Ministry of Steel, Government of India
Fig 8.9 : Production of Finished Steel
Apart from these major steel plants, there
are more than 206 units located in different
parts of the country. Most of these use scrap
iron as their main raw material, and process it
in electric furnaces.
India : People and Economy
2015-16The Cotton Textile Industry
The cotton textile industry is one of the
traditional industries of India. In the ancient
and the medieval times, it used to be only a
cottage industry. India was famous worldwide
for the production of muslin, a very fine variety
of cotton cloth, calicos, chintz and other
different varieties of fine cotton cloth. The
development of this industry in India was due
to several factors. One, it is a tropical country
and cotton is the most comfortable fabric for a
hot and humid climate. Second, large quantity
of cotton was grown in India. Abundant skilled
labour required for this industry was available
in this country. In fact, in some areas the
people were producing cotton textiles for
generations and transferred the skill from one
generation to the other and in the process
perfected their skills.
Initially, the British did not encourage the
development of the indigenous cotton textile
industry. They exported raw cotton to their mills
in Manchester and Liverpool and brought back
the finished products to be sold in India. This
cloth was cheaper because it was produced at
mass scale in factories in U.K. as compared to
the cottage based industries of India.
In 1854, the first modern cotton mill was
established in Mumbai. This city had several
advantages as a cotton textile manufacturing
Spinning yarn in powerloom
Fig 8.10 : Production of Cotton Textile
centre. It was very close to the cotton producing
areas of Gujarat and Maharashtra. Raw cotton
used to be brought to Mumbai port to be
transported to England. Therefore, cotton was
available in Mumbai city itself. Moreover,
Mumbai even then was the financial centre and
the capital needed to start an industry was
available there. As a large town, providing
employment opportunities attracted labour in
large numbers. Hence, cheap and abundant
labour too was available locally. The machinery
required for a cotton textile mill could be directly
Handloom Cotton Textile Industry
Manufacturing Industries
91
2015-16Fig. 8.11 : Cotton Textile Industries
92
India : People and Economy
2015-16imported from England. Subsequently, two
more mills, the Shahpur Mill and the Calico Mill
were established in Ahmedabad. By 1947, the
number of mills in India went up to 423 but
the scenario changed after partition, and this
industry suffered a major recession. This was
due to the fact that the most of the good quality
cotton growing areas had gone to West Pakistan
and India was left with 409 mills and only 29
per cent of the cotton producing area.
After Independence, this industry
gradually recovered and eventually flourished.
The cotton textile industry in India can be
broadly divided into two sectors, the organised
sector and the unorganised sector. The
decentralised sector includes cloth produced
in handlooms (including Khadi) and
powerlooms. The production of the organised
sector has drastically fallen from 81 per cent in
the mid-twentieth century to only about 6 per
cent in 2000. At present, the powerlooms on
the decentralised sector produce more than the
handloom sector.
Cotton is a “pure” raw material which does
not lose weight in the manufacturing process.
so other factors, like, power to drive the looms,
labour, capital or market may determine the
location of the industry. At present the trend is
to locate the industry at or close to markets, as
it is the market that decides what kind of cloth
is to be produced. Also the market for the
finished products is extremely variable,
therefore, it becomes important to locate the
mills close to the market.
After the first mills were set up in Mumbai
and Ahmedabad in the second half of the
nineteenth century, the cotton textile industry
expanded very rapidly. The number of units
increased dramatically. The Swadeshi
movement gave a major impetus to the industry
as there was a call for boycotting all British
made goods in favour of Indian goods. After
1921, with the development of the railway
network other cotton textile centres expanded
rapidly. In southern India, mills were set up
at Coimbatore, Madurai and Bengaluru. In
central India, Nagpur, Indore, Solapur and
Vadodara became cotton textile centres. Cotton
textile mills were set up at Kanpur based on
local investment. Mills were also set up at
Kolkata due to its port facilities. The
development of hydro-electricity also favoured
the location of the cotton textile mills away from
the cotton producing areas. The rapid
development of this industry in Tamil Nadu is
the result of the abundant availability of hydel
power for the mills. Lower labour costs at
centres like Ujjain, Bharuch, Agra, Hathras,
Coimbatore and Tirunelveli also caused
industries to be located away from cotton
producing areas.
Thus, the cotton textile industry is located
in almost every state in India, where one or more
of the locational factors have been favourable.
The importance of raw materials has given way
to market or to a cheaper local labour force or
it may be the availability of power.
Presently, the major centres of the cotton
textile industry are Ahmedabad, Bhiwandi,
Solapur, Kolhapur, Nagpur, Indore and Ujjain.
All these centres are the traditional centres and
are located close to the cotton producing
regions. Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu
are the leading cotton producing states. West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, and Punjab
are the other important cotton textile producers.
(Fig. 8.11)
Tamil Nadu has the largest number of
mills and most of them produce yarn rather
than cloth. Coimbatore has emerged as the
most important centre with nearly half the mills
located there. Chennai, Madurai, Tirunelveli,
Tuticorin, Thanjavur, Ramanathapuram and
Salem are the other important centres. In
Karnataka, the cotton textile industry has
developed in the cotton producing areas in the
north-eastern part of the state. Davangere,
Hubballi, Ballari, Mysuru and Bengaluru are
important centres. The cotton textile industry
is located in the cotton producing Telengana
region, where most of the mills are spinning
mills producing yarn. The important centres
are Hyderabad, Secunderabad and Warangal
in Telangana and Guntur in Andhra Pradesh.
In Uttar Pradesh, Kanpur is the largest
centre. Some of the other important centres are
Manufacturing Industries
93
2015-16Modinagar, Hathras, Saharanpur, Agra and
Lucknow. In West Bengal, the cotton mills are
located in the Hugli region. Howrah,
Serampur, Kolkata and Shyamnagar are the
important centres.
Production of cotton cloth increased almost
five times since independence. Cotton textile has
been facing tough competition from synthetic
cloth. What are the other problems of cotton
textile industry in India?
Sugar Industry
The sugar industry is the second most important
agro-based industry in the country. India is the
largest producer of both sugarcane and cane
sugar and contributes about 8 per cent of the
total sugar production in the world. Besides,
khandasari and gur or jaggery are also prepared
from sugarcane. This industry provides
employment for more than 4 lakh persons
directly and a large number of farmers indirectly.
Sugar industry is a seasonal industry because
of the seasonality of raw materials.
Development of the industry on modern
lines dates back to 1903, when a sugar mill
was started in Bihar. Subsequently, sugar mills
were started in other parts of Bihar and Uttar
Pradesh. In 1950-51, 139 factories were in
operation. The number of sugar factories rose
to 662 in 2010-11.
Location of the Sugar Industry
Sugarcane is a weight-losing crop. The ratio of
sugar to sugarcane varies between 9 to 12 per
cent depending on its variety. Its sucrose
content begins to dry during haulage after it
has been harvested from the field. Better
recovery of sugar is dependent upon its being
crushed within 24 hours of its harvesting.
Sugar factories hence, are located within the
cane producing regions.
Maharashtra has emerged as a leading
sugar producer in the country and produces
more than one-third of the total production of
the sugar in the country.
94
Uttar Pradesh is the second largest
producer of sugar. The sugar factories are
concentrated in two belts – the Ganga-Yamuna
doab and the tarai region. The major sugar
producing centres in the Ganga -Yamuna doab
are Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut,
Ghaziabad, Baghpat and Bulandshahr
districts; while Kheri Lakhimpur, Basti, Gonda,
Gorakhpur, Bahraich are important sugar
producing districts in the Tarai region.
In Tamil Nadu, sugar factories are located
in Coimbatore, Vellore, Tiruvanamalai,
Villupuram and Tiruchchirappalli districts.
Belagavi, Ballari, Mandya, Shivamogga,
Vijayapura and Chitradurg districts are the
major producers in Karnataka. The industry is
distributed in the coastal regions i.e. East
Godavari, West Godavari, Vishakhapatnam
districts of Andhra Pradesh and Nizamabad and
Medak districts of Telangana.
The other States which produce sugar are
Bihar, Punjab, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and
Gujarat. Saran, Champaran, Muzaffarnagar,
Siwan, Darbhanga, and Gaya are the important
sugarcane producing districts in Bihar. The
relative significance of Punjab has declined,
although Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Sangarur,
Patiala and Amritsar are major sugar
producers. In Haryana, sugar factories are
located in Yamuna Nagar, Rohtak, Hissar and
Faridabad districts. Sugar industry is
comparatively new in Gujarat. Sugar mills are
located in the cane growing tracts of Surat,
Junagarh, Rajkot, Amreli, Valsad and
Bhavnagar districts.
Petrochemical Industries
This group of industries has been growing very
fast in India. A variety of products come under
this category of industries. In 1960s, demand
for organic chemicals increased so fast that it
became difficult to meet this demand. At that
time, petroleum refining industry expanded
rapidly. Many items are derived from crude
petroleum, which provide raw materials for
many new industries, these are collectively
India : People and Economy
2015-16known as petrochemical industries. This group
of industries is divided into four sub-groups:
(i) polymers, (ii) synthetic fibres, (iii) elastomers,
and (iv) surfactant intermediate. Mumbai is the
hub of the petrochemical industries. Cracker
units are also located in Auraiya (Uttar
Pradesh), Jamnagar, Gandhinagar and Hajira
(Gujarat), Nagothane, Ratnagiri (Maharashtra),
Haldia (West Bengal) and Vishakhapatnam
(Andhra Pradesh).
Three organisations are working in the
petrochemical sector under the administrative
control of the Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals. First is the Indian Petrochemical
Corporation Limited (IPCL), a public sector
undertaking. It is responsible for the manufacture
and distribution of the various petrochemicals like
polymers, chemicals, fibres and fibre
intermediates. Second is the Petrofils Cooperative
Limited (PCL), a joint venture of the Government
of India and Weaver’s Cooperative Societies. It
produces polyester filament yarn and nylon chips
at its two plants located at Vadodara and Naldhari
in Gujarat. Third is the Central Institute of Plastic
Engineering and Technology (CIPET), involved in
imparting training in petro-chemical industry.
Polymers are made from ethylene and
propylene. These materials are obtained in the
process of refining crude oil. Polymers are used
as raw materials in the plastic industry. Among
polymers, polyethylene is a widely used
thermoplastic. Plastic is first converted into
sheets, powder, resin and pellets, and then used
in manufacturing plastic products. Plastic
products are preferred because of their strength,
flexibility, water and chemical resistance and low
prices. Production of plastic polymers started in
India in the late fifties and the early sixties using
other organic chemicals. The National Organic
Chemicals Industries Limited (NOCIL),
established in private sector in 1961, started the
first naphtha based chemical industry in
Mumbai. Later, several other companies were
formed. The plants located at Mumbai, Barauni,
Mettur, Pimpri and Rishra are the major
producers of plastic materials.
About 75 per cent of these units are in
small scale sector. The industry also uses
recycled plastics, which constitutes about 30
per cent of the total production.
Synthetic fibres are widely used in the
manufacturing of fabrics because of their
inherent strength, durability, washability, and
resistance to shrinkage. Industries
manufacturing nylon and polyester yarns are
located at Kota, Pimpri, Mumbai, Modinagar,
Pune, Ujjain, Nagpur and Udhna. Acrylic staple
fibre is manufactured at Kota and Vadodara.
Manufacturing Industries
95
2015-16Though plastics have become inseparable
items in our daily use and they have affected
our life style. But due to its non-biodegradable
quality it has emerged as the greatest threat to
our environment. Hence, use of plastic is being
discouraged in different states of India. Do you
know how does plastic adversely affect our
environment?
Knowledge based Industries
The advancement in information technology has
had a profound influence on the country’s
economy. The Information Technology (IT)
revolution opened up new possibilities of
economic and social transformation. The IT and
IT enabled business process outsourcing (ITES-
BPO) services continue to be on a robust growth
path. Indian software industry has emerged as
one of the fastest growing sectors in the economy.
The software industry has surpassed electronic
hardware production. The Indian government
has created a number of software parks in the
country.
The IT software and services industry
account for almost 2 per cent of India’s GDP.
India’s software industry has achieved a
remarkable distinction for providing quality
products. A large number of Indian software
companies have acquired international quality
certification. A majority of the multinational
companies operating in the area of information
technology have either software development
centres or research development centres in
India. However, in the hardware development
sector, India is yet to make any remarkable
achievements.
A major impact of this growth has been on
employment creation, which is almost doubled
every year.
Liberalisation, Privatisation,
Globalisation (LPG) and Industrial
Development in India
The new Industrial Policy was announced in
1991. The major objectives of this policy were
to build on the gains already made, correct the
distortions or weaknesses that have crept in,
96
maintain a sustained growth in productivity
and gainful employment and attain
international competitiveness.
Within this policy, measures initiated are :
(1) abolition of industrial licensing, (2) free entry
to foreign technology, (3) foreign investment
policy, (4) access to capital market, (5) open
trade, (6) abolition of phased manufacturing
programme, and (7) liberalised industrial
location programme. The policy has three main
dimensions: liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation.
The industrial licensing system has been
abolished for all except six industries related to
security, strategic or environmental concerns. At
the same time, the number of industries reserved
for public sector since 1956 have been reduced
from 17 to 4. Industries related to atomic energy,
substances specified in the Schedule of the
Department of Atomic Energy as well as Railways
have remained under the public sector. The
government also has decided to offer a part of
the shareholdings in the public enterprises to
financial institutions, general public and
workers. The threshold limits of assets have been
scrapped and no industry requires prior
approval for investing in the delicensed sector.
They only need to submit a memorandum in
the prescribed format.
In the new industrial policy, Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) has been seen as a supplement
to the domestic investment for achieving a
higher level of economic development. FDI
benefits the domestic industry as well as the
consumers by providing technological
upgradation, access to global managerial skills
and practices, optimum use of natural and
human resources, etc. Keeping all this in mind,
foreign investment has been liberalised and the
government has permitted access to an
automatic route for Foreign Direct Investment.
The government has also announced changes
in the industrial location policies. Industries are
discouraged in or very close to large cities due
to environmental reasons.
The industrial policy has been liberalised
to attract private investor both domestic and
multi-nationals. New sectors like, mining,
telecommunications, highway construction and
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 8.12 : Software Technology Parks
Manufacturing Industries
97
2015-16management have been thrown open to private
companies. In spite of all these concessions,
Foreign Direct Investment has not been up to
the expectation. There has been a big gap
between approved and actual foreign direct
investment, even though the numbers of foreign
collaborations are increasing. Larger parts of this
investment have gone to domestic appliances,
finance, services, electronics and electrical
equipment, and food and dairy products.
Globalisation means integrating the
economy of the country with the world
economy. Under this process, goods and
services along with capital, labour and
resources can move freely from one nation to
another. The thrust of globalisation has been
to increase the domestic and external
competition through extensive application of
market mechanism and facilitating dynamic
relationship with the foreign investors and
suppliers of technology. In Indian context, this
implies: (1) opening of the economy to foreign
direct investment by providing facilities to
foreign companies to invest in different fields of
economies activity in India; (2) removing
restrictions and obstacles to the entry of multi-
national companies in India; (3) allowing Indian
companies to enter into foreign collaboration
in India and also encouraging them to set up
joint ventures abroad; (4) carrying out massive
import liberalisation programmes by switching
over from quantitative restrictions to tariffs in
the first place, and then bringing down the level
of import duties considerably; and (5) instead
of a set of export incentives, opting for exchange
rate adjustments for promoting export.
A breakup of foreign collaboration
approval reveals that the major share went to
core, priority sectors while infrastructural sector
was untouched. Further, gap between
developed and developing states has become
wider. Major share of both domestic investment
as well as foreign direct investment went to
already developed states. For example, out of
the total proposed investment by the industrial
entrepreneurs during 1991-2000 nearly one-
fourth (23 per cent) was for industrially
developed Maharashtra, 17 per cent for
Gujarat, 7 per cent for Andhra Pradesh, and
about 6 per cent for Tamil Nadu while Uttar
Pradesh, the state with the largest population
has only 8 per cent. In spite of several
concessions, seven north-eastern states could
get less than 1 per cent of the proposed
investment. In fact, economically weaker states
could not compete with the developed states in
open market in attracting industrial investment
proposals and hence they are likely to suffer
from these processes.
Industrial Regions in India
Industries are not evenly distributed in the
country. They tend to concentrate on certain
locations because of the favourable locational
factors.
Industrial Regions and Districts
Major Industrial Regions (8)
1. Mumabi-Pune Region, 2. Hugli Region, 3. Bengaluru-Tamil Nadu Region, 4. Gujarat Region,
5. Chotanagpur Region, 6. Vishakhapatnam-Guntur Region, 7. Gurgaon-Delhi-Meerut Region, and
8. Kollam-Thiruvananthapuram Region.
Minor Industrial Regions (13)
1. Ambala-Amritsar, 2. Saharanpur-Muzaffarnagar-Bijnor, 3. Indore-Dewas-Uijjain, 4. Jaipur-Ajmer,
5. Kolhapur-South Kannada, 6. Northern Malabar, 7. Middle Malabar, 8. Adilabad-Nizamabad,
9. Allahabad-Varanasi-Mirzapur, 10. Bhojpur-Munger, 11. Durg-Raipur, 12. Bilaspur-Korba, and
13. Brahmaputra valley.
Industrial Districts (15)
1. Kanpur, 2. Hyderabad, 3. Agra, 4. Nagpur, 5. Gwalior, 6. Bhopal, 7. Lucknow, 8. Jalpaiguri,
9. Cuttack, 10. Gorakhpur, 11. Aligarh, 12. Kota, 13. Purnia, 14. Jabalpur, and 15. Bareilly.
98
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 8.13 : India – Major Industrial Region
Manufacturing Industries
99
2015-16Several indices are used to identify the
clustering of industries, important among them
are : (i) the number of industrial units, (ii)
number of industrial workers, (iii) quantum of
power used for industrial purposes, (iv) total
industrial output, and (v) value added by
manufacturing, etc.
Major industrial regions of the country are
given below in some details (Fig. 8.13).
Mumbai-Pune Industrial Region
It extends from Mumbai-Thane to Pune and
in adjoining districts of Nashik and Solapur.
Besides, industrial development has been
rapid in Kolaba, Ahmednagar, Satara, Sangli
and Jalgaon districts. Development of this
region started with the location of cotton
textile industry in Mumbai. Mumbai, with
cotton hinterland and moist climate favoured
the location of cotton textile industry.
Opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 provided
impetus to the growth of Mumbai port.
Machineries were imported through this port.
Hydro-electricity was developed in the
Western Ghat region to meet the requirements
of this industry.
With the development of cotton textile
industry, chemical industry also developed.
Opening of the Mumbai High petroleum field
and erection of nuclear energy plants added
additional pull to this region.
Besides, engineering goods, petroleum
refining, petrochemicals, leather, synthetic
and plastic goods, drugs, fertilisers,
electrical, shipbuilding, electronics, software,
transport equipments and food industries
also developed. Important industrial centres
are Mumbai, Kolaba, Kalyan, Thane,
Trombay, Pune, Pimpri, Nashik, Manmad,
Solapur, Kolhapur, Ahmednagar, Satara and
Sangli.
geographical, economic and political factors
have contributed much to its development. It
developed with the opening of river port on
Hugli. Kolkata emerged as a leading centre of
the country. Later, Kolkata was connected with
interior parts by railway lines and road routes.
Development of tea plantations in Assam and
northern hills of West Bengal, the processing of
indigo earlier and jute later coupled with the
opening of coalfields of the Damodar Valley and
iron ore deposits of the Chotanagpur plateau,
contributed to the industrial development of the
region. Cheap labour available from thickly
populated part of Bihar, eastern Uttar Pradesh
and Odisha also contributed to its development.
Kolkata, being the capital city of British India
(1773-1911), attracted the British capital. The
establishment of first jute mill at Rishra in 1855
ushered in the era of modern industrial
clustering in this region.
The major concentration of jute industry
is at Haora and Bhatapara. The partition of the
country in 1947 adversely affected this
industrial region. Cotton textile industry also
grew along with jute industry, paper,
engineering, textile machinery, electrical,
chemical, pharmaceuticals, fertiliser and
petrochemical industries have also developed
within this region. Factory of the Hindustan
Motors Limited at Konnagar and diesel engine
factory at Chittaranjan are landmarks of this
region. Location of petroleum refinery at Haldia
has facilitated the development of a variety of
industries. Important industrial centres of this
region are Kolkata, Haora, Haldia, Serampur,
Rishra, Shibpur, Naihati, Kakinara,
Shamnagar, Titagarh, Sodepur, Budge Budge,
Birlanagar, Bansberia, Belgurriah, Triveni,
Hugli, Belur, etc. However, industrial growth of
this region has slowed down in comparison to
other regions. Decline of the jute industry is one
of the reasons.
Hugli Industrial Region Bengaluru-Chennai Industrial Region
Located along the Hugli river, this region
extends from Bansberia in the north to
Birlanagar in the south for a distance of about
100 km. Industries also have developed in
Mednipur in the west. Kolkata-Haora from the
nucleus of this industrial region. Historical, This region witnessed most rapid industrial
growth in post-Independence period. Till 1960,
industries were confined to Bengaluru, Salem
and Madurai districts but now they have spread
over all the districts of Tamil Nadu except
Viluppuram. Since, this region is away from the
100
India : People and Economy
2015-16coalfields, its development is dependent on the
Pykara hydroelectric plant, which was built in
1932. Cotton textile industry was the first to
take roots due to the presence of cotton growing
areas. Along with cotton mills, loom industry
spread very rapidly. Several heavy engineering
industries converged at Bengaluru. Aircraft
(HAL), machine tools, telephone (HTL) and
Bharat Electronics are industrial landmarks of
this region. Important industries are textiles,
rail wagons, diesel engines, radio, light
engineering goods, rubber goods, medicines,
aluminium, sugar, cement, glass, paper,
chemicals, film, cigarette, match box, leather
goods, etc. Petroleum refinery at Chennai, iron
and steel plant at Salem and fertiliser plants
are recent developments.
Gujarat Industrial Region
The nucleus of this region lies between
Ahmedabad and Vadodara but this region
extends upto Valsad and Surat in the south and
to Jamnagar in the west. Development of this
region is also associated with the location of the
cotton textile industry since 1860s. This region
became an important textile region with the
decline of the cotton textile industry at Mumbai.
Located in cotton growing area, this region has
double advantage of the proximity of raw
materials as well as of market. The discovery of
oil fields led to the establishment of petrochemical
industries around Ankleshwar, Vadodara and
Jamnagar. The port at Kandla helped in the rapid
growth of this region. Petroleum refinery at
Koyali provided raw materials to a host of
petrochemical industries. The industrial
structure is now diversified. Besides, textiles
(cotton, silk and synthetic fabrics) and
petrochemical industries, other industries are
heavy and basic chemicals, motor, tractor, diesel
engines, textile machinery, engineering,
pharmaceuticals, dyes, pesticides, sugar, dairy
products and food processing. Recently, largest
petroleum refinery has been set up at Jamnagar.
Important industrial centres of this region are
Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Bharuch, Koyali,
Anand, Khera, Surendranagar, Rajkot, Surat,
Valsad and Jamnagar.
Chotanagpur Region
This region extends over Jharkhand, northern
Orissa and western West Bengal and is known
for the heavy metallurgical industries. This
region owes its development to the discovery of
coal in the Damodar Valley and metallic and
non-metallic minerals in Jharkhand and
northern Orissa. Proximity of coal, iron ore and
other minerals facilitated the location of heavy
industries in this region. Six large integrated
iron and steel plants at Jamshedpur, Burnpur-
Kulti, Durgapur, Bokaro and Rourkela are
located within this region. To meet the power
requirement, thermal and hydroelectric plants
have been constructed in the Damodar Valley.
Densely populated surrounding regions
provide cheap labour and Hugli region provides
vast market for its industries. Heavy
engineering, machine tools, fertilisers, cement,
paper, locomotives and heavy electricals are some
of the important industries in this region.
Important centres are Ranchi, Dhanbad,
Chaibasa, Sindri, Hazaribag, Jamshedpur,
Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur, Asansol and
Dalmianagar.
Vishakhapatnam-Guntur Region
This industrial region extends from
Vishakhapatnam district to Kurnool and
Prakasam districts in the south. Industrial
development of this region hinges upon
Vishakhapatnam and Machilipatnam ports and
developed agriculture and rich reserves of
minerals in their hinterlands. Coalfields of the
Godavari basin provide energy. Ship building
industry was started at Vishakhapatnam in
1941. Petroleum refinery based on imported
petroleum facilitated the growth of several
petrochemical industries. Sugar, textile, jute,
paper, fertiliser, cement, aluminium and light
engineering are principal industries of this
region. One lead-zinc smelter is functioning in
Guntur district. Iron and steel plant at
Vishakhapatnam uses the Bailadila iron ore.
Vishakhapatnam, Vijayawada, Vijaynagar,
Rajahmundry, Guntur, Eluru and Kurnool are
important industrial centres.
Manufacturing Industries 101
2015-16Gurgaon-Delhi-Meerut Region Kollam-Thiruvananthapuram Region
Industries located in this region have shown
very fast growth in the recent past. This region
is located far away from the mineral and power
resources, and therefore, the industries are
light and market-oriented. Electronics, light
engineering and electrical goods are major
industries of this region. Besides, there are
cotton, woollen and synthetic fabrics, hosiery,
sugar, cement, machine tools, tractor, cycle,
agricultural implements, chemical and
vanaspati industries which have developed on
large scale. Software industry is a recent
addition. To the south lies the Agra-Mathura
industrial area which specialises in glass and
leather goods. Mathura with an oil refinery is
a petrochemical complex. Among industrial
centres, mention be made of Gurgaon, Delhi,
Shahdara, Faridabad, Meerut, Modinagar,
Ghaziabad, Ambala, Agra and Mathura. This industrial region is spread over
Th iruvananthapuram, Kollam, Alwaye,
Ernakulam and Alappuzha districts.
Plantation agriculture and hydropower
provide industrial base to this region. Located
far away from the mineral belt of the country,
agricultural products processing and market
oriented light industries predominate the
region. Among them, cotton textile, sugar,
rubber, matchbox, glass, chemical fertiliser and
fish-based industries are important. Food
processing, paper, coconut coir products,
aluminium and cement industries are also
significant. Location of petroleum refinery at
Kochchi has added a vista of new industries to
this region. Important industrial centres are
Kollam, Thiruvananthapuram, Alluva, Kochchi,
Alappuzha, and Punalur.
EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the following from the given options.
(i)
Which is not a factor of industrial location?
(ii)
(a) Market
(c)
Population Density
(b) Capital
(d) Power
The earliest Iron and Steel Company to be established in India was:
(a)
(b)
(iii)
(c) Visvesvaraiya Iron and Steel Works
(d) Mysore Iron and Steel Works.
The first modern cotton mill was established in Mumbai because:
(a)
(b)
(iv)
Mumbai is a port
It is located near cotton growing area
(c) Mumbai was the financial centre
(d) All of the above.
The nucleus of the Hugli Industrial Region is:
(a)
(b)
102
IISCO
TISCO
Kolkata-Haora
Kolkata-Rishra
(c)
(d)
Kolkata-Medinipur
Kolkata-Konnagar
India : People and Economy
2015-16(v)
2.
Which one of the following is the second largest producer of sugar:
(a) Maharashtra
(c)
Punjab
(b) Uttar Pradesh
(d)
Tamil Nadu
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
Why do you think that the iron and steel industry is basic to the industrial
development of any country?
(ii)
Name the two sectors of the cottage textile industries. How are they
different?
(iii)
(iv)
3.
Why is the sugar industry a seasonal industry?
What is the raw material base for the petrochemical industry? Name some
of the products of this industry.
(v)
What is the major impact of Information Technology (IT) revolution in India?
Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i) How did the Swadeshi movement give a major impetus to the cotton textiles
industry?
(ii) What do you understand by liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation?
How have they helped industrial development in India?
Manufacturing Industries 103
2015-16
