Unit III
Chapter 6
WATER RESOURCES
Do you think that what exists today will
continue to be so, or the future is going to be
different in some respects? It can be said with
some certainty that the societies will witness
demographic transition, geographical shift of
population, technological advancement,
degradation of environment and water scarcity.
Water scarcity is possibly to pose the greatest
challenge on account of its increased demand
coupled with shrinking supplies due to over
utilisation and pollution. Water is a cyclic
resource with abundant supplies on the globe.
Approximately, 71 per cent of the earth’s
surface is covered with it but fresh water
constitutes only about 3 per cent of the total
water. In fact, a very small proportion of fresh
water is effectively available for human use. The
availability of fresh water varies over space and
time. The tensions and disputes on sharing and
control of this scare resource are becoming
contested issues among communities, regions,
and states. The assessment, efficient use and
conservation of water, therefore, become
necessary to ensure development. In this
chapter, we shall discuss water resources in
India, its geographical distribution, sectoral
utilisation, and methods of its conservation and
management.
Water Resources of India
India accounts for about 2.45 per cent of world’s
surface area, 4 per cent of the world’s water
resources and about 16 per cent of world’s
population. The total water available from
precipitation in the country in a year is about
4,000 cubic km. The availability from surface
water and replenishable groundwater is 1,869
cubic km. Out of this only 60 per cent can be
put to beneficial uses. Thus, the total utilisable
water resource in the country is only 1,122
cubic km.
Surface Water Resources
There are four major sources of surface water.
These are rivers, lakes, ponds, and tanks. In
the country, there are about 10,360 rivers
and their tributaries longer than 1.6 km each.
The mean annual flow in all the river basins
in India is estimated to be 1,869 cubic km.
2015-16However, due to topographical, hydrological
and other constraints, only about 690 cubic
km (32 per cent) of the available surface water
can be utilised. Water flow in a river depends
on size of its catchment area or river basin
and rainfall within its catchment area. You
have studied in your Class XI textbook “India
: Physical Environment” that precipitation in
India has very high spatial variation, and it is
mainly concentrated in Monsoon season. You
also have studied in the textbook that some
of the rivers in the country like the Ganga,
the Brahmaputra, and the Indus have huge
catchment areas. Given that precipitation is
relatively high in the catchment areas of the
Ganga, the Brahmaputra and the Barak
rivers, these rivers, although account for only
about one-third of the total area in the
country, have 60 per cent of the total surface
water resources. Much of the annual water
flow in south Indian rivers like the Godavari,
the Krishna, and the Kaveri has been
harnessed, but it is yet to be done in the
Brahmaputra and the Ganga basins.
Groundwater Resources
The total replenishable groundwater
resources in the country are about 432 cubic
km. Table 6.1 shows that the Ganga and the
Brahamaputra basins, have about 46 per
cent of the total replenishable groundwater
resources. The level of groundwater
utilisation is relatively high in the river basins
lying in north-western region and parts of
south India.
The groundwater utilisation is very high
in the states of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan,
and Tamil Nadu. However, there are States like
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Kerala, etc., which utilise
only a small proportion of their groundwater
potentials. States like Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Tripura and Maharashtra are utilising
their ground water resources at a moderate
rate. If the present trend continues, the
Table 6.1 : Basinwise Ground water Potential and Utilisation in India (Cubic Km/Year)
S.
No.
Name of Basin
Ground Water Resources
1. Brahmani with Baitarni
2. Brahmaputra
3.
Total Replenishable
Utilisation (%)
4.05
Level of Groundwater
8.45
26.55 3.37
Chambal Composite 7.19 40.09
4. Kaveri 12.3 55.33
5. Ganga 170.99 33.52
6. Godavari 40.65 19.53
7. Indus 26.49 77.71
8. Krishna 26.41 30.39
9. Kuchchh and Saurashtra including river Luni 11.23 51.14
10. Chennai and South Tamil Nadu 18.22 57.68
11. Mahanadi 16.46 6.95
12. Meghna (Barak & Others) 13. 8.52 3.94
Narmada 10.83 21.74
14. Northeast Composite 18.84 17.2
15. Pennar 4.93 36.6
16. Subarnrekha 1.82 9.57
17. Tapi 8.27 33.05
18. Western Ghat 17.69 22.88
431.42 31.97
Total
Source: Ministry of Water Resources, Govt. of India, New Delhi;
http://wrmin.nic.in/resource/gwresource1.htm
Water Resources
61
2015-16Fig. 6.1 : India – River Basins
62
India : People and Economy
2015-16demands for water would need the supplies.
And such situation, will be detrimental to
development, and can cause social upheaval
and disruptions.
Exercise based on Table 6.1 :
1. Which river basin has the highest total
replenishable ground water resource?
2. In which river basin is the level of ground
water utilisation the highest?
3. Which river basin has the lowest total
replenishable ground water resource?
4. In which river basin is the level of ground
water utilisation the lowest?
5. Draw a bar diagram to show the total
replenishable ground water resources
in 10 major river basins.
6. Draw a bar diagram to show the levels
of ground water utilisation of the same
10 major river basins for which you have
made the first bar diagram.
Lagoons and Backwaters
India has a vast coastline and the coast is very
indented in some states. Due to this, a number
of lagoons and lakes have formed. The States like
Kerala, Odisha and West Bengal have vast
surface water resources in these lagoons and
lakes. Although, water is generally brackish in
these water-bodies, it is used for fishing and
irrigating certain varieties of paddy crops,
coconut, etc.
Water Demand and Utilisation
India has traditionally been an agrarian
economy, and about two-third of its population
have been dependent on agriculture. Hence,
development of irrigation to increase agricultural
production has been assigned a very high
priority in the Five Year Plans, and multipurpose
river valleys projects like the Bhakra-Nangal,
Hirakud, Damodar Valley, Nagarjuna Sagar,
Indira Gandhi Canal Project, etc. have been taken
up. In fact, India’s water demand at present is
dominated by irrigational needs.
As shown in Fig. 6.2 and 6.3, agriculture
accounts for most of the surface and ground
water utilisation, it accounts for 89 per cent of
the surface water and 92 per cent of the
groundwater utilisation. While the share of
industrial sector is limited to 2 per cent of the
surface water utilisation and 5 per cent of the
ground-water, the share of domestic sector is
higher (9 per cent) in surface water utilisation
as compared to groundwater. The share of
Source: Earth Trend 2001, World Resource Institute, as given in Govt. of India (2002) Report
Fig. 6.2 : Sectoral Usage of Surface Water
Fig. 6.3 : Sectoral Usage of Groundwater
Water Resources
63
2015-16agricultural sector in total water utilisation is
much higher than other sectors. However, in
future, with development, the shares of
industrial and domestic sectors in the country
are likely to increase.
Demand of Water for Irrigation
In agriculture, water is mainly used for
irrigation. Irrigation is needed because of
spatio-temporal variability in rainfall in the
country. The large tracts of the country are
deficient in rainfall and are drought prone.
North-western India and Deccan plateau
constitute such areas. Winter and summer
seasons are more or less dry in most part of
the country. Hence, it is difficult to practise
agriculture without assured irrigation during
dry seasons. Even in the areas of ample
rainfall like West Bengal and Bihar, breaks
in monsoon or its failure creates dry spells
detrimental for agriculture. Water need of
certain crops also makes irrigation necessary.
For instance, water requirement of rice,
sugarcane, jute, etc. is very high which can
be met only through irrigation.
Provision of irrigation makes multiple
cropping possible. It has also been found that
irrigated lands have higher agricultural
productivity than unirrigated land. Further, the
high yielding varieties of crops need regular
moisture supply, which is made possible only
by a developed irrigation systems. In fact, this
is why that green revolution strategy of
agriculture development in the country has
largely been successful in Punjab, Haryana and
western Uttar Pradesh.
Fig. 6.4 : The Ganga and its Tributaries and Towns Located on them
64
India : People and Economy
2015-16In Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar
Pradesh more than 85 per cent of their net
sown area is under irrigation. Wheat and rice
are grown mainly with the help of irrigation in
these states. Of the total net irrigated area 76.1
per cent in Punjab and 51.3 per cent in Haryana
are irrigated through wells and tube wells. This
shows that these states utilise large proportion
of their ground water potential which has
resulted in ground water depletion in these
states. The share of area irrigated through wells
and tube wells is also very high in the states
given in table 6.2.
Table 6.2 : Percentage of net irrigated area
to total by wells and Tube-wells
State
Percentage
Gujarat 86.6
Rajasthan 77.2
Madhya Pradesh 66.5
Maharashtra
Uttar Pradesh
65
58.21
West Bengal 57.6
Tamil Nadu 54.7
What is the pattern of well and Tube-well
irrigation discernible from the above table?
What are the implications of using ground
water in drought prone area of Rajasthan,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu?
The over-use of ground water resources
has led to decline in ground water table in these
states. In fact, over withdrawals in some states
like Rajasthan, and Maharashtra has increased
fluoride concentration in ground-water, and this
practice has led to increase in concentration of
arsenic in parts of West Bengal and Bihar.
Intensive irrigation in Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar
Pradesh is increasing salinity in the soil and depletion
of ground water irrigation. Discuss its likely impacts on
agriculture.
Emerging Water Problems
The per capita availability of water is dwindling
day by day due to increase in population. The
available water resources are also getting
polluted with industrial, agricultural and
domestic effluents, and this, in turn, is further
limiting the availability of usable water
resources.
Deterioration of Water Quality
Water quality refers to purity of water, or water
without unwanted foreign substances. Water
gets polluted by foreign matters such as micro-
organisms, chemicals, industrial and other
wastes. Such matters deteriorate the quality of
water and render it unfit for human use. When
toxic substances enter lakes, streams, rivers,
ocean and other water bodies, they get dissolved
or lie suspended in water. This results in pollution
of water whereby quality of water deteriorates
affecting aquatic systems. Sometimes, these
pollutants also seep down and pollute
groundwater. The Ganga and the Yamuna are
the two highly polluted rivers in the country.
Find out which are the major towns/cities located on
the bank of the Ganga and its tributaries and major
industries they have.
Water Conservation and Management
Since there is a declining availability of fresh
water and increasing demand, the need has
arisen to conserve and effectively manage this
precious life giving resource for sustainable
development. Given that water availability from
sea/ocean, due to high cost of desalinisation,
is considered negligible, India has to take quick
steps and make effective policies and laws, and
adopt effective measures for its conservation.
Besides developing water saving technologies
and methods, attempts are also to be made to
prevent the pollution. There is need to
encourage watershed development, rainwater
harvesting, water recycling and reuse, and
conjunctive use of water for sustaining water
supply in long run.
Water Resources
65
2015-16Discuss the issues highlighted in the
news items.
Prevention of Water Pollution
Available water resources are degrading
rapidly. The major rivers of the country
generally retain better water quality in less
densely populated upper stretches in hilly
areas. In plains, river water is used intensively
for irrigation, drinking, domestic and industrial
purposes. The drains carrying agricultural
(fertilisers and insecticides), domestic (solid and
liquid wastes), and industrial effluents join the
rivers. The concentration of pollutants in rivers,
especially remains very high during the summer
season when flow of water is low.
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
in collaboration with State Pollution Control
Boards has been monitoring water quality of
national aquatic resources at 507 stations. The
66
data obtained from these stations show that
organic and bacterial contamination continues
to be the main source of pollution in rivers. The
Yamuna river is the most polluted river in the
country between Delhi and Etawah. Other
severely polluted rivers are: the Sabarmati at
Ahmedabad, the Gomti at Lucknow, the Kali, the
Adyar, the Cooum (entire stretches), the Vaigai
at Madurai and the Musi of Hyderabad and the
Ganga at Kanpur and Varanasi. Groundwater
pollution has occurred due to high
concentrations of heavy/toxic metals, fluoride
and nitrates at different parts of the country.
The legislative provisions such as the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974,
and Environment Protection Act 1986 have not
been implemented effectively. The result is that
in 1997, 251 polluting industries were located
India : People and Economy
2015-16along the rivers and lakes. The Water Cess Act,
1977, meant to reduce pollution has also made
marginal impacts. There is a strong need to
generate public awareness about importance of
water and impacts of water pollution. The public
awareness and action can be very effective in
reducing the pollutants from agricultural
activities, domestic and industrial discharges.
Recycle and Reuse of Water
Another way through which we can improve
fresh water availability is by recycle and reuse.
Use of water of lesser quality such as reclaimed
waste-water would be an attractive option for
industries for cooling and fire fighting to reduce
their water cost. Similarly, in urban areas water
after bathing and washing utensils can be used
for gardening. Water used for washing vehicle
can also be used for gardening. This would
conserve better quality of water for drinking
purposes. Currently, recycling of water is practised
on a limited scale. However, there is enormous
scope for replenishing water through recycling.
Observe the quantity of water used at your home in
various activities and enlist the ways in which the water
can be reused and recycled in various activities.
Class teachers should organise a discussion on recycle
and reuse of water.
Watershed Management
Watershed management basically refers to
efficient management and conservation of
surface and groundwater resources. It involves
prevention of runoff and storage and recharge
of groundwater through various methods like
percolation tanks, recharge wells, etc. However,
in broad sense watershed management includes
conservation, regeneration and judicious use of
all resources – natural (like land, water, plants
and animals) and human with in a watershed.
Watershed management aims at bringing about
balance between natural resources on the one
hand and society on the other. The success of
watershed development largely depends upon
community participation.
The Central and State Governments have
initiated many watershed development and
management programmes in the country. Some
of these are being implemented by non-
governmental organisations also. Haryali is a
watershed development project sponsored by
the Central Government which aims at enabling
the rural population to conserve water for
drinking, irrigation, fisheries and afforestation.
The Project is being executed by Gram
Panchayats with people’s participation.
Neeru-Meeru (Water and You) programme
(in Andhra Pradesh) and Arvary Pani Sansad
(in Alwar, Rajasthan) have taken up
constructions of various water-harvesting
structures such as percolation tanks, dug out
ponds (Johad), check dams, etc. through
people’s participation. Tamil Nadu has made
water harvesting structures in the houses
compulsory. No building can be constructed
without making structures for water harvesting.
Watershed development projects in some
areas have been successful in rejuvenating
environment and economy. However, there are
only a few success stories. In majority of cases,
the programme is still in its nascent stage. There
is a need to generate awareness regarding
benefits of watershed development and
management among people in the country, and
through this integrated water resource
management approach water availability can be
ensured on sustainable basis.
Rainwater Harvesting
Rain water harvesting is a method to capture
and store rainwater for various uses. It is also
used to recharge groundwater aquifers. It is a
low cost and eco-friendly technique for
preserving every drop of water by guiding the
rain water to bore well, pits and wells. Rainwater
harvesting increases water availability, checks
the declining ground water table, improves the
quality of groundwater through dilution of
contaminants like fluoride and nitrates,
prevents soil erosion, and flooding and arrests
salt water intrusion in coastal areas if used to
recharge aquifers.
Rainwater harvesting has been practised
through various methods by different
communities in the country for a long time.
Water Resources
67
2015-16Watershed Development in Ralegan Siddhi, Ahmadnagar, Maharashtra:
A Case Study
Ralegan Siddhi is a small village in the district of Ahmadnagar, Maharashtra. It has become an
example for watershed development throughout the country.
In 1975, this village was caught in a web of poverty and illicit liquor trade. The transformation took place
when a retired army personnel, settled down in the village and took up the task of watershed development.
He convinced villagers about the importance of family planning and voluntary labour; preventing open
grazing, felling trees, and liquor prohibition.
Voluntary labour was necessary to ensure minimum dependence on the government for financial
aids. “It socialised the costs of the projects.” explained the activist. Even those who were working
outside the village contributed to the development by committing a month’s salary every year.
Work began with the percolation tank constructed in the village. In 1975, the tank could not hold
water. The embankment wall leaked. People voluntarily repaired the embankment. The seven wells
below it swelled with water in summer for the first time in the living memory of the people. The people
reposed their faith in him and his visions.
A youth group called Tarun Mandal was formed. The group worked to ban the dowry system, caste
discrimination and untouchability. Liquor distilling units were removed and prohibition imposed. Open
grazing was completely banned with a new emphasis on stall-feeding. The cultivation of water-intensive
crops like sugarcane was banned. Crops such as pulses, oilseeds and certain cash crops with low
water requirements were encouraged.
All elections to local bodies began to be held
on the basis of consensus. “It made the
community leaders complete representatives
of the people.” A system of Nyay Panchayats
(informal courts) were also set up. Since then,
no case has been referred to the police.
A Rs.22 lakh school building was constructed
using only the resources of the village. No
donations were taken. Money, if needed, was
borrowed and paid back. The villagers took pride
in this self-reliance. A new system of sharing
Ralegan Siddhi before mitigation approach
labour grew out of this infusion of pride and
voluntary spirit. People volunteered to help each other in agricultural operation. Landless labourers also
gained employment. Today the village plans to
buy land for them in adjoining villages.
At present, water is adequate; agriculture is
flourishing, though the use of fertilisers and
pesticides is very high. The prosperity also brings
the question of ability of the present generation
to carry on the work after the leader of the
movement who declared that, “The process of
Ralegan’s evolution to an ideal village will not
stop. With changing times, people tend to evolve
new ways. In future, Ralegan might present a
different model to the country.”
Ralegan Siddhi after mitigation approach
What a mitigation approach can do? A success story.
68
India : People and Economy
2015-16Fig. 6.5 : Various Methods of Rainwater Harvesting
Traditional rain water harvesting in rural areas
is done by using surface storage bodies like
lakes, ponds, irrigation tanks, etc. In Rajasthan,
rainwater harvesting structures locally known
as Kund or Tanka (a covered underground
tank) are constructed near or in the house or
village to store harvested rainwater (see Fig. 6.5
to understand various ways of rainwater
harvesting).
There is a wide scope to use rainwater
harvesting technique to conserve precious
water resource. It can be done by harvesting
rainwater on rooftops and open spaces.
Harvesting rainwater also decreases the
Water Resources
69
2015-16community dependence on groundwater for
domestic use. Besides bridging the demand-
supply gap, it can also save energy to pump
groundwater as recharge leads to rise in
groundwater table. These days rainwater
harvesting is being taken up on massive scale
in many states in the country. Urban areas
can specially benefit from rainwater
harvesting as water demand has already
outstripped supply in most of the cities and
towns.
Apart from the above mentioned factors,
the issue desalinisation of water particularly
in coastal areas and brackish water in arid and
semi-arid areas, transfer of water from water
surplus areas to water deficit areas through
inter linking of rivers can be important
remedies for solving water problem in India
(read more about inter linking of rivers).
However, the most important issue from the
point of view of individual users, household
and communities is pricing of water.
Highlights of India’s National Water Policy, 2002
The National Water Policy 2002 stipulates water allocation priorities broadly in the following order:
drinking water; irrigation, hydro-power, navigation, industrial and other uses. The policy stipulates
progressive new approaches to water management. Key features include:
• Irrigation and multi-purpose projects should invariably include drinking water component, wherever
there is no alternative source of drinking water.
• Providing drinking water to all human beings and animals should be the first priority.
• Measures should be taken to limit and regulate the exploitation of groundwater.
• Both surface and groundwater should be regularly monitored for quality. A phased programme
should be undertaken for improving water quality.
• The efficiency of utilisation in all the diverse uses of water should be improved.
• Awareness of water as a scarce resource should be fostered.
• Conservation consciousness should be promoted through education, regulation, incentives and
disincentives.
Source : Govt. of India (2002), ‘India’s Reform Initiatives in Water Sector’, Ministry for Rural Development, New Delhi
EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the following from the given options.
(i)
Which one of the following types describes water as a resource?
(a)
(b)
70
Abiotic resource
Non-renewable Resources
(c)
(d)
Biotic Resource
Cyclic Resource
India : People and Economy
2015-16(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Which one of the following rivers has the highest replenishable ground
water resource in the country?
(a) The Indus
(c)
The Ganga
(b) The Brahmaputra
(d) The Godavari
Which of the following figures in cubic kilometres correctly shows the
total annual precipitation in India?
(a) 2,000
(c)
4,000
(b) 3,000
(d) 5,000
Which one of the following south Indian states has the highest
groundwater utilisation (in per cent) of its total ground water potential?
(a)
(b)
The
one
(a)
Tamil Nadu
(c)
Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka
(d) Kerala
highest proportion of the total water used in the country is in which
of the following sectors?
Irrigation
(c) Domestic use
(b) Industries
(d) None of the above
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
It is said that the water resources in India have been depleting very fast.
Discuss the factors responsible for depletion of water resources?
(ii)
What factors are responsible for the highest groundwater development
in the states of Punjab, Haryana, and Tamil Nadu?
(iii)
Why the share of agricultural sector in total water used in the country is
expected to decline?
(iv)
3.
What can be possible impacts of consumption of contaminated/unclean
water on the people?
Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)
Discuss the availability of water resources in the country and factors
that determine its spatial distribution?
(ii) The depleting water resources may lead to social conflicts and disputes.
Elaborate it with suitable examples?
(iii) What is watershed management? Do you think it can play an important
role in sustainable development?
Water Resources
71
2015-16
