Unit I
Chapter 1
POPULATION
Distribution, Density, Growth
and Composition
The people are very important component of a
country. India is the second most populous
country after China in the world with its total
population of 1,028 million (2001). India’s
population is larger than the total population
of North America, South America and Australia
put together. More often, it is argued that such
a large population invariably puts pressure
on its limited resources and is also responsible
for many socio-economic problems in the
country.
How do you perceive the idea of India? Is
it simply a territory? Does this signify an
amalgam of people? Is it a territory
inhabited by people living under certain
institutions of governance?
In this chapter, we will discuss the
patterns of distribution, density, growth and
composition of India’s population.
Sources of Population Data
Population data are collected through
Census operation held every 10 years in our
country. The first population Census in India
was conducted in 1872 but its first complete
Census was conducted only in 1881.
Distrib
ution of P
opula
tion
Distribution
Popula
opulation
Examine Fig. 1.1 and try to describe the
patterns of spatial distribution of population
shown on it. It is clear that India has a highly
uneven pattern of population distribution. The
percentage shares of population of the states
and Union Territories in the country (Appendix –
iA) show that Uttar Pradesh has the highest
population followed by Maharashtra, Bihar and
West Bengal.
Looking at the data in Appendix (i) and iA arrange the
Indian states and union territories according to their
sizes and population and find out :
2015-16Fig. 1.1 : India – Distribution of Population
2
India : People and Economy
2015-16States/UTs of large size and large population
States/UTs of large size but small population
States/UTs of smaller size but larger population
Check from the table (Appendix–iA) that U.P.,
Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal, Andhra
Pradesh along with Tamil Nadu, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Gujarat,
together account for about 76 per cent of the
total population of the country. On the other
hand, share of population is very small in the
states like Jammu & Kashmir (1.04%),
Arunachal Pradesh (0.11%) and Uttarakhand
(0.84%) inspite of theses states having fairly
large geographical area.
Such an uneven spatial distribution of
population in India suggests a close relationship
between population and physical, socio-
economic and historical factors. As far as the
physical factors are concerned, it is clear that
climate along with terrain and availability of
water largely determines the pattern of the
population distribution. Consequently, we
observe that the North Indian Plains, deltas and
Coastal Plains have higher proportion of
population than the interior districts of southern
and central Indian States, Himalayas, some of
the north eastern and the western states.
However, development of irrigation (Rajasthan),
availability of mineral and energy resources
(Jharkhand) and development of transport
network (Peninsular States) have resulted in
moderate to high concentration of population
in areas which were previously very thinly
populated.
Among the socio-economic and historical
factors of distribution of population, important
ones are evolution of settled agriculture and
agricultural development; pattern of human
settlement; development of transport network,
industrialisation and urbanisation. It is
observed that the regions falling in the river
plains and coastal areas of India have remained
the regions of larger population concentration.
Even though the uses of natural resources like
land and water in these regions have shown
the sign of degradation, the concentration of
population remains high because of an early
history of human settlement and development
of transport network. On the other hand, the
urban regions of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Bangalore, Pune, Ahmedabad, Chennai and
Jaipur have high concentration of population
due to industrial development and
urbanisation drawing a large numbers of
rural-urban migrants.
Density of P
opula
tion
Popula
opulation
Density of population, is expressed as number
of persons per unit area. It helps in getting a
better understanding of the spatial distribution
of population in relation to land. The density of
population in India (2011) is 382 persons per
sq km. There has been a steady increase of more
than 200 persons per sq km over the last 50
years as the density of population increased
from 117 persons/ sq km in 1951 to 382
persons/sq km in 2011.
The data shown in Appendix (i)A give an
idea of spatial variation of population densities
in the country which ranges from as low as 17
persons per sq km in Arunachal Pradesh to
11,320 persons in the National Capital Territory
of Delhi. Among the northern Indian States,
Bihar (1106), West Bengal (1028) and and Uttar
Pradesh (829) have higher densities, while
Kerala (860) and Tamil Nadu (555) have higher
densities among the peninsular Indian states.
States like Assam, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Odisha have moderate
densities. The hill states of the Himalayan region
and North eastern states of India (excluding
Assam) have relatively low densities while the
Union Territories (excluding Andaman and
Nicobar islands) have very high densities of
population (Appendix–iA).
The density of population, as discussed
in the earlier paragraph, is a crude measure
of human and land relationship. To get a better
insight into the human-land ratio in terms of
pressure of population on total cultivable land,
the physiological and the agricultural densities
should be found out which are significant for
a country like India having a large agricultural
population.
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
3
2015-16Fig. 1.2 : India – Density of Population
Activity: Construct a choropleth map to represent Density of population in India-2011 based on data given in
Appendix– iA and compare that with the above map.
4
India : People and Economy
2015-16Physiological density = total population /
net cultivated area
Agricultural density = total agricultural
population / net cultivable area
Agricultural population includes cultivators
and agricultural labourers and their family
members.
With the help of data given in Appendix (ii), Calculate
the Physiological and Agricultural densities of
population of Indian States and Union Territories.
Compare them with density of population and see how
are these different?
G r rowth
owth of P
opula
tion
Popula
opulation
Growth of population is the change in the
number of people living in a particular area
between two points of time. Its rate is expressed
in percentage. Population growth has two
components namely; natural and induced.
While the natural growth is analysed by
assessing the crude birth and death rates, the
induced components are explained by the
volume of inward and outward movement of
people in any given area. However, in the
present chapter, we will only discuss the
natural growth of India’s population.
The decadal and annual growth rates of
population in India are both very high and
steadily increasing over time. The annual
growth rate of India’s population is 1.64 per
cent (2011).
Population Doubling Time
Population doubling time is the time taken
by any population to double itself at its
current annual growth rate.
The growth rate of population in India over
the last one century has been caused by annual
birth rate and death rate and rate of migration
and thereby shows different trends. There are
four distinct phases of growth identified within
this period:
Table 1.1 : Decadal Growth Rates in India, 1901-2001
Census
Total Population
Years
Growth Rate*
Absolute Number
% of Growth
1901 238396327 ------------ ------------
1911 252093390 (+) 13697063 (+) 5.75
1921 251321213 (-) 772117 (-) 0.31
1931 278977238 (+) 27656025 (+) 11.60
1941 318660580 (+) 39683342 (+) 14.22
1951 361088090 (+) 42420485 (+) 13.31
1961 439234771 (+) 77682873 (+) 21.51
1971 548159652 (+) 108924881 (+) 24.80
1981 683329097 (+) 135169445 (+) 24.66
1991 846302688 (+) 162973591 (+) 23.85
2001 1028610328 (+) 182307640 (+) 21.54
2011** 1210193422 (+) 181583094 (+) 17.64
p 2 -p 1
×100
* Decadal growth rate: g =
p 2
where
P 1 = population of the base year
P 2 = population of the present year
** Source : Census of India, 2011(Provisional)
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
5
2015-16Fig. 1.3 : India – Growth of Population
Activity: Construct a choropleth map to represent Growth of population in India (2001-2011) based on data given in
Appendix– iA and compare it with the above map.
6
India : People and Economy
2015-16Phase I : The period from 1901-1921 is
referred to as a period of stagnant
or stationary phase of growth of
India’s population, since in this
period growth rate was very low,
even recording a negative growth
rate during 1911-1921. Both the
birth rate and death rate were high
keeping the rate of increase low
(Appendix–iii). Poor health and
medical services, illiteracy of people
at large and inefficient distribution
system of food and other basic
necessities were largely responsible
for a high birth and death rates in
this period.
Phase II : The decades 1921-1951 are
referred to as the period of steady
population growth. An overall
improvement in health and
sanitation throughout the country
brought down the mortality rate. At
the same time better transport and
communication system improved
distribution system. The crude
birth rate remained high in this
period leading to higher growth rate
than the previous phase. This is
impressive at the backdrop of Great
Economic Depression, 1920s and
World War II.
Phase III : The decades 1951-1981 are
referred to as the period of
population explosion in India,
which was caused by a rapid fall
in the mortality rate but a high
fertility rate of population in the
country. The average annual
growth rate was as high as 2.2 per
cent. It is in this period, after the
Independence, that developmental
activities were introduced through
a centralised planning process and
economy started showing up
ensuring the improvement of living
condition of people at large.
Consequently, there was a high
natural increase and higher growth
rate.
Besides,
increased
international migration bringing in
Tibetans, Bangladeshis, Nepalies
and even people from Pakistan
contributed to the high growth rate.
Phase IV : In the post 1981 till present, the
growth rate of country’s population
though remained high, has started
slowing down gradually (Table 1.1).
A downward trend of crude birth
rate is held responsible for such a
population growth. This was, in
turn, affected by an increase in the
mean age at marriage, improved
quality of life particularly education
of females in the country.
The growth rate of population is, however,
still high in the country, and it has been
projected by World Development Report that
population of India will touch 1,350 million by
2025.
The analysis done so far shows the average
growth rate, but the country also has wide
variation (Appendix–iv) in growth rates from one
area to another which is discussed below.
R e gional V
aria
tion in
Varia
ariation
P opula
tion Gr
owth
opulation
Growth
The growth rate of population during 1991-
2001 in Indian States and Union Territories
shows very obvious pattern.
The States like Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Puducherry,
and Goa show a low rate of growth not exceeding
20 per cent over the decade. Kerala registered
the lowest growth rate (9.4) not only in this group
of states but also in the country as a whole.
A continuous belt of states from west to
east in the north-west, north, and north central
parts of the country has relatively high growth
rate than the southern states. It is in this belt
comprising Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, West Bengal,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, and Jharkhand, the growth
rate on the average remained 20-25 per cent.
During 2001-2011, the growth rates of
almost all States and Union Territories have
registered a lower figure compared to the
previous decade, namely, 1991-2001. The
percentage decadal growth rates of the six most
populous States, namely, Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal, Andhra
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
7
2015-16Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have all fallen
during 2001-2011 compared to 1991-2001,
the fall being the lowest for Andhra Pradesh
(3.5% percentage points) and highest for
Maharashtra (6.7 percentage points). Tamil
Nadu (3.9 percentage points) and Puducherry
(7.1 percentage points) have registered some
increase during 2001-2011 over the previous
decade.
With the help of data given in Appendix i and iA, compare
the growth rate of population of different States/UTs
between 1990-2001 and 2001-2011.
Take the population growth data of the districts/selected
districts of your respective state for total male and female
population and represent them with the help of
Composite Bar Graph.
An important aspect of population growth
in India is the growth of its adolescents. At
present the share of adolescents i.e., up to the
age group of 10-19 years is about 20.9 per cent
(201 1), among which male adolescents
constitute 52.7 per cent and female adolescents
constitute 47.3 per cent. The adolescent
population, though, regarded as the youthful
population having high potentials, but at the
same time they are quite vulnerable if not guided
and channelised properly. There are many
challenges for the society as far as these
adolescents are concerned, some of which are
lower age at marriage, illiteracy – particularly
female illiteracy, school dropouts, low intake of
nutrients, high rate of maternal mortality of
adolescent mothers, high rates of HIV/AIDS
infections, physical and mental disability or
retardedness, drug abuse and alcoholism, juvenile
delinquency and commitence of crimes, etc.
In view of these, the Government of India
has undertaken certain policies to impart
proper education to the adolescent groups so
that their talents are better channelised and
properly utilised. The National Youth Policy is
one example which has been designed to look
8
into the overall development of our large youth
and adolescent population.
The National Youth Policy of Government
of India, launched in 2003, stresses on an all-
round improvement of the youth and
adolescents enabling them to shoulder
responsibility
towards
constructive
development of the country. It also aims at
reinforcing the qualities of patriotism and
responsible citizenship.
The thrust of this policy is youth
empowerment in terms of their effective
participation in decision making and carrying
the responsibility of an able leader. Special
emphasis was given in empowering women and
girl child to bring parity in the male-female
status. Moreover, deliberate efforts were made
to look into youth health, sports and recreation,
creativity and awareness about new innovations
in the spheres of science and technology.
It appears from the above discussion that
the growth rate of population is widely variant
over space and time in the country and also
highlights various social problems related to the
growth of population. However, in order to have
a better insight into the growth pattern of
population it is also necessary to look into the
social composition of population.
P opula
tion Composition
opulation
Population composition is a distinct field of
study within population geography with a vast
coverage of analysis of age and sex, place of
residence, ethnic characteristics, tribes,
language, religion, marital status, literacy and
education, occupational characteristics, etc. In
this section, the composition of Indian
population with respect to their rural-urban
characteristics, language, religion and pattern
of occupation will be discussed.
Rural – Urban Composition
Composition of population by their respective
places of residence is an important indicator of
social and economic characteristics. This becomes
even more significant for a country where about
68.8 per cent of its total population lives in village
(2011).
India : People and Economy
2015-16Compare the data given in Appendix (iv) and iv A
calculate the percentages of rural population of the
states in India and represent them cartographically on
a map of India.
Do you know that India has 640,867
villages according to the Census 2011 out of
which 597,608 (93.2 per cent) are inhabited
villages? However, the distribution of rural
population is not uniform throughout the
country. You might have noted that the states
like Bihar and Sikkim have very high
percentage of rural population. The states of
Goa and Maharashtra have only little over half
of their total population residing in villages.
The Union Territories, on the other hand,
have smaller proportion of rural population,
except Dadra and Nagar Haveli (53.38 per cent).
The size of villages also varies considerably. It
is less than 200 persons in the hill states of
north-eastern India, Western Rajasthan and
Rann of Kuchchh and as high as 17 thousand
persons in the states of Kerala and in parts of
Maharashtra. A thorough examination of the
pattern of distribution of rural population of
India reveals that both at intra-State and inter-
State levels, the relative degree of urbanisation
and extent of rural-urban migration regulate
the concentration of rural population.
You have noted that contrary to rural
population, the proportion of urban population
(31.16 per cent) in India is quite low but it is
showing a much faster rate of growth over the
decades. The growth rate of urban population
has accelerated due to enhanced economic
development and improvement in health and
hygienic conditions.
The distribution of urban population too,
as in the case of total population, has a wide
variation throughout the country (Appendix–iv).
a considerable increase of urban population.
This indicates both development of urban areas
in terms of socio-economic conditions and an
increased rate of rural-urban migration. The
rural-urban migration is conspicuous in the
case of urban areas along the main road links
and railroads in the North Indian Plains, the
industrial areas around Kolkata, Mumbai,
Bengaluru – Mysuru, Madurai – Coimbatore,
Ahmedabad – Surat, Delhi – Kanpur and
Ludhiana – Jalandhar. In the agriculturally
stagnant parts of the middle and lower Ganga
Plains, Telengana, non-irrigated Western
Rajasthan, remote hilly, tribal areas of north-
east, along the flood prone areas of Peninsular
India and along eastern part of Madhya
Pradesh, the degree of urbanisation has
remained low.
Linguistic Composition
India is a land of linguistic diversity. According
to Grierson (Linguistic Survey of India, 1903 –
1928) there were 179 languages and as many
as 544 dialects in the country. In the context of
modern India, there are about 22 scheduled
languages and a number of non-scheduled
languages. See how many languages appear
on a ten Rs note. Among the scheduled
languages, the speakers of Hindi have the
highest percentage. The smallest language
groups are Kashmiri and Sanskrit speakers.
However, it is noticed that the linguistic regions
in the country do not maintain a sharp and
distinct boundary, rather they gradually merge
and overlap in their respective border zones.
Linguistic Classification
The speakers of major Indian languages
belong to four language families, which have
their sub-families and branches or groups.
This can be better understood from Table 1.2.
Religious Composition
Compare the data of Appendix (iv) and iv A and identify
the states/UTs with very high and very low proportion of
urban population.
It is, however, noticed that in almost all
the states and Union Territories, there has been
Religion is one of the most dominant forces
affecting the cultural and political life of the most
of Indians. Since religion virtually permeates
into almost all the aspects of people’s family and
community lives, it is important to study the
religious composition in detail.
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
9
2015-16Table 1.2 : Classification of Modern Indian Languages
Family
Sub-Family
Austro-Asiatic
Austric
(Nishada)
1.38%
Branch/Group
Speech Areas
Mon-Khmer Meghalaya, Nicobar Islands
Munda West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Assam,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
Austro- Nesian
Outside India
South-Dravidian Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala
Central Dravidian Andhra Pradesh, M.P., Orissa,
Maharashtra
North Dravidian Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal,
Madhya Pradesh
Tibeto-Himalayan Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh,
Sikkim
North Assam Arunachal Pradesh
Siamese-Chinese Assam- Myanmari Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram,
Tripura, Meghalaya
Indo-Aryan Iranian Outside India
Dardic Jammu & Kashmir
Indo-Aryan Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Himachal
Pradesh, U.P., Rajasthan, Haryana, M.P.,
Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal, Assam,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa.
Dravidian
(Dravida)
20%
Tibeto – Myanmari
Sino-Tibetan
(Kirata)
0.85%
Indo –
European
(Aryan) 73%
Source : Ahmed, A. (1999) : Social Geography, Rawat Publication, New Delhi
Table 1.3 : Religious Communities of India, 2001
Look at Table 1.2 and prepare a pie diagram of linguistic
composition of India showing the sectoral shares of
each linguistic group.
Or
Prepare a qualitative symbol map of India showing the
distribution of different linguistic groups in the country.
The spatial distribution of religious
communities in the country (Appendix–v) shows
that there are certain states and districts having
large numerical strength of one religion, while
the same may be very negligibly represented in
other states.
Hindus are distributed as a major group in
many states (ranging from 70 - 90 per cent and
above) except the districts of states along Indo-
Bangladesh border, Indo-Pak border, Jammu &
Kashmir, Hill States of North-East and in scattered
areas of Deccan Plateau and Ganga Plain.
Religious
2001
Groups Population
(in million)
% of Total
Hindus 827.6 80.5
Muslims 138.2 13.5
Christians 24.1 2.3
Sikhs 19.2 1.9
Buddhists 8.0 0.9
Jains 4.2 0.4
Others 6.6 0.6
Muslims, the largest religious minority, are
concentrated in Jammu & Kashmir, certain
districts of West Bengal and Kerala, many
districts of Uttar Pradesh , in and around Delhi
and in Lakshadweep. They form majority in
Kashmir valley and Lakshadweep.
10 India : People and Economy
2015-16Religion and Landscape
Formal expression of religions on
landscape is manifested through sacred
structures, use of cemetries and
assemblages of plants and animals, groves
of trees for religious purposes. Sacred
structures are widely distributed throughout
the country. These may range from
inconspicuous village shrines to large Hindu
temples, monumental masjids or ornately
designed cathedrals in large metropolitan
cities. These temples, masjids, gurudwaras,
monastries and churches differ in size,
form, space – use and density, while
attributing a special dimension to the total
landscape of the area.
The Christian population is distributed
mostly in rural areas of the country. The main
concentration is observed along the Western
coast around Goa, Kerala and also in the hill
states of Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Chotanagpur area and Hills of Manipur.
Sikhs are mostly concentrated in relatively
small area of the country, particularly in the
states of Punjab, Haryana and Delhi.
Jains and Buddhists, the smallest religious
groups in India have their concentration only
in selected areas of the country. Jains have
major concentration in the urban areas of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra, while the
Buddhists are concentrated mostly in
Maharashtra. The other areas of Buddhist
majority are Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh,
Ladakh in Jammu & Kashmir, Tripura, and
Lahul and Spiti in Himachal Pradesh.
The other religions of India include
Zoroastrians, tribal and other indigenous faiths
and beliefs. These groups are concentrated in
small pockets scattered throughout the country.
Composition of Working Population
The population of India according to their
economic status is divided into three groups,
namely; main workers, marginal workers and
non-workers.
It is observed that in India, the proportion
of workers (both main and marginal) is only 39.8
Standard Census Definition
Main Worker is a person who works for
atleast 183 days ( or six months) in a year.
Marginal Worker is a person who works for
less than 183 days ( or six months) in a year.
per cent (2011) leaving a vast majority of about
60 per cent as non-workers. This indicates an
economic status in which there is a larger
proportion of dependent population, further
indicating possible existence of large number of
unemployed or under employed people.
What is work participation rate?
The proportion of working population, of
the states and Union Territories show a
moderate variation from about 39.6 per cent in
Goa to about 49.9 per cent in Daman and Diu.
The states with larger percentages of workers
are Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Meghalaya.
Among the Union Territories, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Daman and Diu have higher
participation rate. It is understood that, in the
context of a country like India, the work
participation rate tends to be higher in the areas
of lower levels of economic development since
number of manual workers are needed to
perform the subsistence or near subsistence
economic activities.
The occupational composition (see box)
of India’s population (which actually means
engagement of an individual in farming,
manufacturing trade, services or any kind of
professional activities) shows a large proportion
of primary sector workers compared to
secondary and tertiary sectors. About 54.6 per
cent of total working population are cultivators
and agricultural labourers, whereas only 3.8%
of workers are engaged in household industries
and 41.6 % are other workers including non-
household industries, trade, commerce,
construction and repair and other services. As
far as the occupation of country’s male and
female population is concerned, male workers
out-number female workers in all the three
sectors (Fig.1.4 and Table 1.4).
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
11
2015-16Fig. 1.4 : India – Occupational Structure, 2011
Identify some issues in which
India is ahead of or lagging
behind its neighbours.
12 India : People and Economy
2015-16The number of female workers is relatively
high in primary sector, though in recent years
there has been some improvement in work
The 2001 Census has divided the working
participation of women in secondary and
population of India into four major categories:
tertiary sectors.
1. Cultivators
It is important to note that the proportion
2. Agricultural Labourers
of workers in agricultural sector in India has
3. Household Industrial Workers
shown a decline over the last few decades (58.2%
in 2001 to 54.6% in 2011). Consequently, the
4. Other Workers.
participation rate in secondary and tertiary sector
has registered an increase. This indicates a shift
of dependence of workers from farm-
Table 1.4 : Sectoral Composition of work force in India, 2011 based occupations to non-farm
based ones, indicating a sectoral shift
Categories
Population
in the economy of the country.
The spatial variation of work
Persons
% to
Male
Female
participation rate in different sectors
total
in the country (Appendix–v and vA)
Workers
is very wide. For instance, the states
like Himachal Pradesh and Nagaland
Primary
26,30,22,473
54.6
16,54,47,075 9,75,75,398
have very large shares of cultivators.
Secondary
1,83,36,307
3.8
97,75,635
85,60,672
On the other hand states like Bihar,
Tertiary
20,03,84,531
41.6
15,66,43,220 4,37,41,311
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal
and Madhya Pradesh have higher proportion of
agricultural labourers. The highly urbanised
areas like Delhi, Chandigarh and Puducherry
have a very large proportion of workers being
Prepare composite bar graphs, one for India and the engaged in other services. This indicates not only
other for your respective states showing the proportion availability of limited farming land, but also large
of male and female workers in agriculture, household scale urbanisation and industrialisation
industries and other sectors, and compare.
requiring more workers in non-farm sectors.
Occupational Categories
EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the followings from the given options.
(i)
India’s population as per 2011 census is :
(a) 1028 million
(c)
3287 million
(b)
3182 million
(d)
1210 million
Population: Distribution, Density, Growth and Composition
13
2015-16(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
2.
(b) Kerala
(d) Punjab
Which one of the following states has the highest proportion of urban
population in India according to 2011 Census?
(a) Tamil Nadu
(c)
Kerala
(b) Maharashtra
(d) Goa
Which one of the following is the largest linguistic group of India?
(a) Sino – Tibetan
(c)
Austric
(b) Indo – Aryan
(d)
Dravidian
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
Very hot and dry and very cold and wet regions of India have low density
of population. In this light, explain the role of climate on the distribution
of population.
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
3.
Which one of the following states has the highest density of population in
India?
(a) West Bengal
(c)
Uttar Pradesh
Which states have large rural population in India? Give one reason for
such large rural population.
Why do some states of India have higher rates of work participation than
others?
‘The agricultural sector has the largest share of Indian workers.’ – Explain.
Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)
Discuss the spatial pattern of density of population in India.
(ii)
Give an account of the occupational structure of India’s population.
14 India : People and Economy
2015-16
