Unit III
Chapter 5
LAND RESOURCES
AND AGRICULTURE
You must have observed that the land around
you is put to different uses. Some land is
occupied by rivers, some may have trees and
on some parts roads and buildings have been
built. Different types of lands are suited to
different uses. Human beings thus, use land
as a resource for production as well as residence
and recreation. Thus, the building of your
school, roads on which you travel, parks in
which you play, fields in which crops are grown
and the pastures where animals graze represent
different uses to which land is put.
Land Use Categories
Land-use records are maintained by land
revenue department. The land use categories
add up to reporting area, which is somewhat
different from the geographical area. The
Survey of India is responsible for measuring
geographical area of administrative units in
India. Have you ever used a map prepared by
Survey of India? The difference between the two
concepts are that while the former changes
somewhat depending on the estimates of the
land revenue records, the latter does not change
and stays fixed as per Survey of India
measurements. You may be familiar with land
use categories as they are also included in your
Social Science textbook of Class X.
The land-use categories as maintained in
the Land Revenue Records are as follows :
(i)
Forests : It is important to note that
area under actual forest cover is
different from area classified as forest.
The latter is the area which the
Government has identified and
demarcated for forest growth. The land
revenue records are consistent with
the latter definition. Thus, there may
be an increase in this category without
any increase in the actual forest cover.
(ii) Land put to Non-agricultural Uses :
Land under settlements (rural and
urban), infrastructure (roads, canals,
etc.), industries, shops, etc. are
included in this category. An expansion
in the secondary and tertiary activities
2015-16would lead to an increase in this
category of land-use.
(iii) Barren and Wastelands : The land
which may be classified as a
wasteland such as barren hilly
terrains, desert lands, ravines, etc.
normally cannot be brought under
cultivation with the available
technology.
(iv) Area under Permanent Pastures and
Grazing Lands : Most of this type land
is owned by the village ‘Panchayat’ or
the Government. Only a small
proportion of this land is privately
owned. The land owned by the village
panchayat comes under ‘Common
Property Resources’.
(v)
Area under Miscellaneous Tree
Crops and Groves(Not included is
Net sown Area) : The land under
orchards and fruit trees are included
in this category. Much of this land is
privately owned.
(vi) Culturable Waste-Land : Any land
which is left fallow (uncultivated) for
more than five years is included in this
category. It can be brought under
cultivation after improving it through
reclamation practices.
(vii) Current Fallow : This is the land
which is left without cultivation for one
or less than one agricultural year.
Fallowing is a cultural practice adopted
for giving the land rest. The land
recoups the lost fertility through natural
processes.
(viii) Fallow other than Current Fallow :
This is also a cultivable land which is
left uncultivated for more than a year
but less than five years. If the land is
left uncultivated for more than five
years, it would be categorised as
culturable wasteland.
(ix) Net Area Sown : The physical
extent of land on which crops are
sown and harvested is known as net
sown area.
Land-use Changes in India
Land-use in a region, to a large extent, is
influenced by the nature of economic
activities carried out in that region. However,
while economic activities change over time,
land, like many other natural resources, is
fixed in terms of its area. At this stage, one
needs to appreciate three types of changes
that an economy undergoes, which affect
land-use.
(i)
The size of the economy (measured
in terms of value for all the goods and
services produced in the economy)
grows over time as a result of
increasing population, change in
income levels, available technology
and associated factors. As a result, the
pressure on land will increase with
time and marginal lands would come
under use.
(ii)
Secondly, the composition of the
economy would undergo a change over
time. In other words, the secondary and
the tertiary sectors usually grow much
faster than the primary sector, specifically
the agricultural sector. This type of
change is common in developing
countries like India. This process would
result in a gradual shift of land from
agricultural uses to non-agricultural
uses. You would observe that such
changes are sharp around large urban
areas. The agricultural land is being used
for building purposes.
(iii)
Thirdly, though the contribution of the
agricultural activities reduces over time,
the pressure on land for agricultural
activities does not decline. The reasons
for continued pressure on agricultural
land are:
(a) In developing countries, the
share of population dependent
on agriculture usually declines
much more slowly compared to
the decline in the sector’s share
in GDP.
(b) The number of people that the
agricultural sector has to feed is
increasing day by day.
Land Resources and Agriculture
41
2015-16Note : Categories (iv) and (v) of Section I have been clubbed together in the graph.
Fig. 5.1
Compare the change in shares of primary, secondary
and tertiary sectors in GDP between 1960-61 and 1999-
2000 with the changes of land-use between 1960-61
and 2008-09 using Appendix (vii) Tables 1 and 2.
India has undergone major changes within
the economy over the past four or five decades,
and this has influenced the land-use changes
in the country. These changes between 1960-
61 and 2008-09 have been shown in Fig. 5.1.
There are two points that you need to remember
before you derive some meaning from this
figure. Firstly, the percentages shown in the
figure have been derived with respect to the
reporting area. Secondly, since even the
reporting area has been relatively constant over
the years, a decline in one category usually
leads to an increase in some other category.
Four categories have undergone increases,
while four have registered declines. Share of
area under forest, area under non-agricultural
uses, current fallow lands and net area sown
have shown an increase. The following
observations can be made about these
increases:
(i) The rate of increase is the highest in case
of area under non-agricultural uses. This
is due to the changing structure of
Indian economy, which is increasingly
42
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
depending on the contribution from
industrial and services sectors and
expansion of related infrastructural
facilities. Also, an expansion of area
under both urban and rural settlements
has added to the increase. Thus, the area
under non-agricultural uses is
increasing at the expense of wastelands
and agricultural land.
The increase in the share under forest,
as explained before, can be accounted
for by increase in the demarcated area
under forest rather than an actual
increase in the forest cover in the country.
The increase in the current fallow cannot
be explained from information
pertaining to only two points. The trend
of current fallow fluctuates a great deal
over years, depending on the variability
of rainfall and cropping cycles.
The increase in net area sown is a recent
phenomenon due to use of culturable
waste land for agricultural pupose.
Before which it was registering a slow
decrease. There are indications that
most of the decline had occurred due to
the increases in area under non-
agricultural use. (Note : the expansion
of building activity on agricultural land
in your village and city).
India : People and Economy
2015-16The four categories that have registered a
decline are barren and wasteland, culturable
wasteland, area under pastures and tree crops
and fallow lands.
The following explanations can be given
for the declining trends:
(i) As the pressure on land increased, both
from the agricultural and non-
agricultural sectors, the wastelands and
culturable wastelands have witnessed
decline over time.
(ii) The decline in land under pastures and
grazing lands can be explained by
pressure from agricultural land. Illegal
encroachment due to expansion of
cultivation on common pasture lands is
largely responsible for this decline.
particular relevance for the livelihood of the
landless and marginal farmers and other
weaker sections since many of them depend on
income from their livestock due to the fact that
they have limited access to land. CPRs also are
important for women as most of the fodder and
fuel collection is done by them in rural areas.
They have to devote long hours in collecting fuel
and fodder from a degraded area of CPR.
CPRs can be defined as community’s natural
resource, where every member has the right of
access and usage with specified obligations,
without anybody having property rights over
them. Community forests, pasture lands, village
water bodies and other public spaces where a
group larger than a household or family unit
exercises rights of use and carries responsibility
of management are examples of CPRs.
Agricultural Land Use in India
What is the difference between actual increase and
rate of increase? Work out the actual increase and
rate of increases for all the land use categories between
1960-61 and 2008-09 from the data given in the Appendix
(vii) (Table 1). Explain the results.
Note for Teacher
For calculating actual increase, the difference of the
land-use categories should be worked out over the two
periods.
For deriving the rate of increase, simple growth rate i.e.
(difference of values between the two time points i.e.
value of terminal year minus base year / base year or
1960-61 value) should be used, e.g.
Net sown Area in 2008-09 - Net sown A rea in 1960-61
 ́ 100
Net sown A rea in 1960-61
Common Pr
oper
ty R
esour
ces
Proper
operty
Resour
esources
Land, according to its ownership can broadly
be classified under two broad heads – private
land and common property resources (CPRs).
While the former is owned by an individual or a
group of individuals, the latter is owned by the
state meant for the use of the community. CPRs
provide fodder for the livestock and fuel for the
households along with other minor forest
products like fruits, nuts, fibre, medicinal
plants, etc. In rural areas, such land is of
Land resource is more crucial to the livelihood
of the people depending on agriculture:
(i) Agriculture is a purely land based
activity unlike secondary and tertiary
activities. In other words, contribution
of land in agricultural output is more
compared to its contribution in the
outputs in the other sectors. Thus, lack
of access to land is directly correlated
with incidence of poverty in rural areas.
(ii)
Quality of land has a direct bearing on
the productivity of agriculture, which is
not true for other activities.
(iii)
In rural areas, aside from its value as a
productive factor, land ownership has
a social value and serves as a security
for credit, natural hazards or life
contingencies, and also adds to the social
status.
An estimation of the total stock of
agricultural land resources (i.e. total cultivable
land) can be arrived at by adding up net sown
area, all fallow lands and culturable wasteland.
It may be observed from Table 5.1 that over the
years, there has been a marginal decline in the
available total stock of cultivable land as a
percentage to total reporting area. There has been
a greater decline of cultivated land, in spite of a
corresponding decline of cultivable wasteland.
Land Resources and Agriculture
43
2015-16Table 5.1 : Composition of Total Cultivable Land
Agricultural Land-use
Categories
Culturable Waste Land
As a percentage of
Reporting Area
As percentage of
total cultivated land
1960-61 2008-09 1960-61
2008-09
6.23 4.17 10.61 7.14
Fallow other than Current Fallow
Current Fallow
Net Area Sown 3.5
3.73
45.26 3.37
4.76
46.24 5.96
6.35
77.08 5.75
8.13
78.98
Total Cultivable Land 58.72 58.54 100.00 100.00
It is clear from the above discussion that
the scope for bringing in additional land under
net sown area in India is limited. There is, thus,
an urgent need to evolve and adopt land-saving
technologies. Such technologies can be classified
under two heads – those which raise the yield
of any particular crop per unit area of land and
those which increase the total output per unit
area of land from all crops grown over one
agricultural year by increasing land-use
intensity. The advantage of the latter kind of
technology is that along with increasing output
from limited land, it also increases the demand
for labour significantly. For a land scarce but
labour abundant country like India, a high
cropping intensity is desirable not only for fuller
utilisation of land resource, but also for
reducing unemployment in the rural economy.
The cropping intensity (CI) is calculated as
follows :
Cropping Intensity in percentage =
GCA
 ́ 100
NSA
this season facilitate the cultivation of temperate
and subtropical crops such as wheat, gram and
mustard. Zaid is a short duration summer
cropping season beginning after harvesting of
rabi crops. The cultivation of watermelons,
cucumbers, vegetables and fodder crops during
this season is done on irrigated lands. However,
this type of distinction in the cropping season
does not exist in southern parts of the country.
Here, the temperature is high enough to grow
tropical crops during any period in the year
provided the soil moisture is available.
Therefore, in this region same crops can be
grown thrice in an agricultural year provided
there is sufficient soil moisture.
Types of Farming
On the basis of main source of moisture for
crops, the farming can be classified as irrigated
and rainfed (barani). There is difference in the
nature of irrigated farming as well based on
objective of irrigation, i.e. protective or
productive. The objective of protective irrigation
Cropping Seasons in India
There are three distinct crop
seasons in the northern and
interior parts of country, namely
kharif, rabi and zaid. The kharif
season largely coincides with
Southwest Monsoon under which
the cultivation of tropical crops
such as rice, cotton, jute, jowar,
bajra and tur is possible. The rabi
season begins with the onset of
winter in October-November and
ends in March-April. The low
temperature conditions during
44
Table 5.2 : Cropping Seasons in India
Cropping Season
Major Crops Cultivated
Northern States Southern States
Kharif
June-September Rice, Cotton, Bajra,
Maize, Jowar, Tur Rice, Maize, Ragi,
Jowar, Groundnut
Rabi
October – March Wheat, Gram, Rapeseeds
and Mustard, Barley Rice, Maize, Ragi,
Groundnut, Jowar
Vegetables, Fruits,
Fodder Rice, Vegetables,
Fodder
Zaid
April–June
India : People and Economy
2015-16is to protect the crops from adverse effects of soil
moisture deficiency which often means that
irrigation acts as a supplementary source of water
over and above the rainfall. The strategy of this
kind of irrigation is to provide soil moisture to
maximum possible area. Productive irrigation is
meant to provide sufficient soil moisture in the
cropping season to achieve high productivity. In
such irrigation the water input per unit area of
cultivated land is higher than protective irrigation.
Rainfed farming is further classified on the basis
of adequacy of soil moisture during cropping
season into dryland and wetland farming. In
India, the dryland farming is largely confined
to the regions having annual rainfall less than 75
cm. These regions grow hardy and drought
resistant crops such as ragi, bajra, moong, gram
and guar (fodder crops) and practise various
measures of soil moisture conservation and rain
water harvesting. In wetland farming, the
rainfall is in excess of soil moisture requirement
of plants during rainy season. Such regions may
face flood and soil erosion hazards. These areas
grow various water intensive crops such as rice,
jute and sugarcane and practise aquaculture in
the fresh water bodies.
Foodgrains
The importance of foodgrains in Indian
agricultural economy may be gauged from the
fact these crops occupy about two-third of total
cropped area in the country. Foodgrains are
dominant crops in all parts of the country
whether they have subsistence or commercial
agricultural economy. On the basis of the
structure of grain the foodgrains are classified
as cereals and pulses.
Rice
Rice is a staple food for the overwhelming
majority of population in India. Though, it is
considered to be a crop of tropical humid areas,
it has about 3,000 varieties which are grown in
different agro-climatic regions. These are
successfully grown from sea level to about
2,000 m altitude and from humid areas in
eastern India to dry but irrigated areas of
Punjab, Haryana, western U.P. and northern
Rajasthan. In southern states and West Bengal
the climatic conditions allow the cultivation of
two or three crops of rice in an agricultural year.
In West Bengal farmers grow three crops of rice
called ‘aus’, ‘aman’ and ‘boro’. But in
Himalayas and northwestern parts of the
country, it is grown as a kharif crop during
southwest Monsoon season.
India contributes 21.6 per cent of rice
production in the world and ranked second
after China in 2008-09. About one-fourth of
the total cropped area in the country is under
rice cultivation. West Bengal, Punjab and
Uttar Pradesh were the leading rice producing
states in the country in 2009-10. The yield level
of rice is high in Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Haryana,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal and
Kerala. In the first four of these states almost the
entire land under rice cultivation is irrigated.
Punjab and Haryana are not traditional rice
Cereals
The cereals occupy about 54 per cent of total
cropped area in India. The country produces
about 11 per cent cereals of the world and ranks
third in production after China and U.S.A. India
produces a variety of cereals, which are
classified as fine grains (rice, wheat) and coarse
grains (jowar, bajra, maize, ragi), etc. Account
of important cereals has been given in the
following paragraphs :
Fig. 5.2 : Rice transplantation in southern parts of India
growing areas. Rice cultivation in the irrigated
areas of Punjab and Haryana was introduced
in 1970s following the Green Revolution.
Genetically improved varieties of seed, relatively
high usage of fertilisers and pesticides and lower
levels of susceptibility of the crop to pests due
Land Resources and Agriculture
45
2015-16Fig. 5.3 : India – Distribution of Rice
46
India : People and Economy
2015-16to dry climatic conditions are responsible for
higher yield of rice in this region. The yield of
this crop is very low in rainfed areas of Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Odisha.
Wheat
Wheat is the second most important cereal crop
in India after rice. India produces about 12 per
cent of total wheat production of world. It is
primarily a crop of temperate zone. Hence, its
cultivation in India is done during winter i.e.
rabi season. About 85 per cent of total area
under this crop is concentrated in north and
central regions of the country i.e. Indo-Gangetic
Plain, Malwa Plateau and Himalayas up to
2,700 m altitude. Being a rabi crop, it is mostly
grown under irrigated conditions. But it is a
rainfed crop in Himalayan highlands and parts
of Malwa plateau in Madhya Pradesh.
About 14 per cent of the total cropped area
in the country is under wheat cultivation. Uttar
Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh are five leading wheat
producing states. The yield level of wheat is
very high (above 4,000 k.g. per ha) in Punjab
and Haryana whereas, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Bihar have moderate yields. The
states like Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh
and Jammu and Kashmir growing wheat under
rainfed conditions have low yield.
Bajra
Bajra is sown in hot and dry climatic conditions
in northwestern and western parts of the
country. It is a hardy crop which resists frequent
dry spells and drought in this region. It is
cultivated alone as well as part of mixed
cropping. This coarse cereal occupies about 5.2
per cent of total cropped area in the country.
Leading producers of bajra are the states of
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Haryana. Being a rainfed crop, the yield level
of this crop is low in Rajasthan and fluctuates a
lot from year to year. Yield of this crop has
increased during recent years in Haryana and
Gujarat due to introduction of drought resistant
varieties and expansion of irrigation under it.
Maize
Maize is a food as well as fodder crop grown
under semi-arid climatic conditions and over
inferior soils. This crop occupies only about
3.6 per cent of total cropped area. Maize
cultivation is not concentrated in any specific
region. It is sown all over India except eastern
and north-eastern regions. The leading
producers of maize are the states of Madhya
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,
Karnataka, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Yield
level of maize is higher than other coarse cereals.
It is high in southern states and declines
towards central parts.
Jowar
The coarse cereals together occupy about
16.50 per cent of total cropped area in the
country. Among these, jowar or sorghum alone
accounts for about 5.3 per cent of total
cropped area. It is main food crop in semi-arid
areas of central and southern India.
Maharashtra alone produces more than half
of the total jowar production of the country.
Other leading producer states of jowar are
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana. It is sown in both kharif and
rabi seasons in southern states. But it is a
kharif crop in northern India where it is mostly
grown as a fodder crop. South of Vindhyachal
it is a rainfed crop and its yield level is very
low in this region.
Pulses
Pulses are a very important ingredient of
vegetarian food as these are rich sources of
proteins. These are legume crops which
increase the natural fertility of soils through
nitrogen fixation. India is a leading producer of
pulses and accounts for about one-fifth of the
total production of pulses in the world. The
cultivation of pulses in the country is largely
concentrated in the drylands of Deccan and
central plateaus and northwestern parts of the
country. Pulses occupy about 11 per cent of
the total cropped area in the country. Being the
rainfed crops of drylands, the yields of pulses
are low and fluctuate from year to year. Gram
and tur are the main pulses cultivated in India.
Land Resources and Agriculture
47
2015-16Fig. 5.4 : India – Distribution of Wheat
48
India : People and Economy
2015-16Gram Groundnut
Gram is cultivated in subtropical areas. It is
mostly a rainfed crop cultivated during rabi
season in central, western and northwestern parts
of the country. Just one or two light showers or
irrigations are required to grow this crop
successfully. It has been displaced from the
cropping pattern by wheat in Haryana, Punjab
and northern Rajasthan following the green
revolution. At present, gram covers only about
2.8 per cent of the total cropped area in the
country. Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and
Rajasthan are the main producers of this pulse
crop. The yield of this crop continues to be low
and fluctuates from year to year even in irrigated
areas. India produces about 18.8 per cent of the total
groundnut production in the world (2008-09).
It is largely a rainfed kharif crop of drylands.
But in southern India, it is cultivated during rabi
season as well. It covers about 3.6 per cent of
total cropped area in the country. Gujarat, Tamil
Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka
and Maharashtra are the leading producers.
Yield of groundnut is comparatively high in
Tamil Nadu where it is partly irrigated. But its
yield is low in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka.
Tur (Arhar)
Tur is the second important pulse crop in the
country. It is also known as red gram or pigeon
pea. It is cultivated over marginal lands and
under rainfed conditions in the dry areas of
central and southern states of the country. This
crop occupies only about 2 per cent of total
cropped area of India. Maharashtra alone
contributes about one-third of the total
production of tur. Other leading producer states
are Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat and
Madhya Pradesh. Per hectare output of this crop
is very low and its performance is inconsistent.
Rapeseed and Mustard
Rapeseed and mustard comprise several oilseeds
as rai, sarson, toria and taramira. These are
subtropical crops cultivated during rabi season
in north-western and central parts of India.
These are frost sensitive crops and their yields
fluctuate from year to year. But with the
expansion of irrigation and improvement in seed
technology, their yields have improved and
stabilised to some extent. About two-third of the
cultivated area under these crops is irrigated.
These oilseeds together occupy only 2.5 per cent
of total cropped area in the country. Rajasthan
contributes about one-third production while
other leading producers are Uttar Pradesh,
Haryana, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh.
Yields of these crops are comparatively high in
Haryana and Rajasthan.
Other Oilseeds
Differentiate between different foodgrains. Mix grains of
various kinds and separate cereals from pulses. Also,
separate fine from coarse cereals.
Soyabean and sunflower are other important
oilseeds grown in India. Soyabean is mostly
grown in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
Oilseeds
The oilseeds are produced for extracting edible
oils. Drylands of Malwa plateau, Marathwada,
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Telangana, Rayalseema
region of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka
plateau are oilseeds growing regions of India.
These crops together occupy about 14 per cent
of total cropped area in the country.
Groundnut, rapeseed and mustard, soyabean
and sunflower are the main oilseed crops grown
in India.
Fig. 5.5 : Farmers sowing soyabean seeds in Amravati,
Maharashtra
Land Resources and Agriculture
49
2015-16Fig. 5.6 : India – Distribution of Cotton and Jute
50
India : People and Economy
2015-16These two states together produce about 90 per
cent of total output of soyabean in the country.
Sunflower cultivation is concentrated in
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and
adjoining areas of Maharashtra. It is a minor
crop in northern parts of the country where its
yield is high due to irrigation. in south. Leading producers of this crop are
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh,
Punjab and Haryana. Per hectare output of
cotton is high under irrigated conditions in
north-western region of the country. Its yield
is very low in Maharashtra where it is grown
under rainfed conditions.
Fibre Crops Jute
These crops provide us fibre for preparing cloth,
bags, sacks and a number of other items.
Cotton and jute are two main fibre crops grown
in India. Jute is used for making coarse cloth, bags, sacks
and decorative items. It is a cash crop in West
Bengal and adjoining eastern parts of the
country. India lost large jute growing areas to
East Pakistan (Bangladesh) during partition. At
present, India produces about three-fifth of jute
production of the world. West Bengal accounts
for about three-fourth of the production in the
country. Bihar and Assam are other jute growing
areas. Being concentrated only in a few states,
this crop accounts for only about 0.5 per cent of
total cropped area in the country.
Cotton
Cotton is a tropical crop grown in kharif season
in semi-arid areas of the country. India lost a
large proportion of cotton growing area to
Pakistan during partition. However, its acreage
has increased considerably during the last 50
years. India grows both short staple (Indian)
cotton as well as long staple (American) cotton
called ‘narma’ in north-western parts of the
country. Cotton requires clear sky during
flowering stage.
Other Crops
Sugarcane, tea and coffee are other important
crops grown in India.
Sugarcane
Sugarcane is a crop of tropical areas. Under
rainfed conditions, it is cultivated in sub-humid
and humid climates. But it is largely an irrigated
crop in India. In Indo-Gangetic plain, its
cultivation is largely concentrated in Uttar
Pradesh. Sugarcane growing area in western
India is spread over Maharashtra and Gujarat.
Fig. 5.7 : Cotton Cultivation
India ranks fourth in the world in the
production of cotton after China, U.S.A. and
Pakistan and accounts for about 8.3 per cent
of production of cotton in the world. Cotton
occupies about 4.7 per cent of total cropped
area in the country. There are three cotton
growing areas, i.e. parts of Punjab, Haryana and
northern Rajasthan in north-west, Gujarat and
Maharashtra in the west and plateaus of
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
Fig. 5.8 : Sugarcane Cultivation
Land Resources and Agriculture
51
2015-16Fig. 5.9 : India – Distribution of Sugarcane
52
India : People and Economy
2015-16In southern India, it is cultivated in irrigated
tracts of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Telangana
and Andhra Pradesh.
India was the second largest producer of
sugarcane after Brazil in 2008-09. It accounts
for about 23 per cent of the world production
of sugarcane. But it occupies only 2.4 per cent
of total cropped area in the country. Uttar
Pradesh produces about two-fifth of sugarcane
of the country. Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are other
leading producers of this crop where yield level
of sugarcane is high. Its yield is low in northern
India.
Tea
Tea is a plantation crop used as beverage. Black
tea leaves are fermented whereas green tea leaves
are unfermented. Tea leaves have rich content of
caffeine and tannin. It is an indigenous crop of
hills in northern China. It is grown over
undulating topography of hilly areas and well-
drained soils in humid and sub-humid tropics
and sub-tropics. In India, tea plantation started
in 1840s in Brahmaputra valley of Assam which
still is a major tea growing area in the country.
Later on, its plantation was introduced in the
sub-Himalayan region of West Bengal (Darjiling,
Jalpaiguri and Cooch Bihar districts). Tea is also
cultivated on the lower slopes of Nilgiri and
after Sri Lanka and China. Assam accounts for
about 53.2 per cent of the total cropped area and
contributes more than half of total production of
tea in the country. West Bengal and Tamil Nadu
are the other leading producers of tea.
Coffee
Coffee is a tropical plantation crop. Its seeds
are roasted, ground and are used for preparing
a beverage. There are three varieties of coffee
i.e. arabica, robusta and liberica. India mostly
grows superior quality coffee, arabica, which
is in great demand in International market. But
India produces only about 3.2 per cent coffee
of the world and ranks seventh after Brazil,
Vietnam, Colombia, Indonesia, Ethopia and
Mexico in 2008-09. Coffee is cultivated in the
highlands of Western Ghats in Karnataka,
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Karnataka alone
accounts for more than two-third of total
production of coffee in the country.
Agricultural Development in India
Agriculture continues to be an important sector
of Indian economy. In 2001 about 53 per cent
population of the country was dependent on it.
The importance of agricultural sector in India
can be gauged from the fact that about 57 per
cent of its land is devoted to crop cultivation,
whereas, in the world, the corresponding share
is only about 12 per cent. In spite of this, there
is tremendous pressure on agricultural land
in India, which is reflected from the fact that
the land-human ratio in the country is only 0.31
ha which is almost half of that of the world as a
whole (0.59 ha). Despite various constraints,
Indian agriculture has marched a long way
since Independence.
Strategy of Development
Fig. 5.10 : Tea Farming
Cardamom hills in Western Ghats. India is a
leading producer of tea and accounts for about
28 per cent of total production in the world.
India’s share in the international market of tea
has declined substantially. At present, it ranks
third among tea exporting countries in the world
Indian agricultural economy was largely
subsistence in nature before Independence. It
had dismal performance in the first half of
twentieth century. This period witnessed severe
droughts and famines. During partition about
one-third of the irrigated land in undivided
India went to Pakistan. This reduced the
proportion of irrigated area in Independent
Land Resources and Agriculture
53
2015-16Fig. 5.11 : India – Distribution of Tea and Coffee
54
India : People and Economy
2015-16India. After Independence, the immediate goal
of the Government was to increase foodgrains
production by (i) switching over from cash
crops to food crops; (ii) intensification of
cropping over already cultivated land; and (iii)
increasing cultivated area by bringing cultivable
and fallow land under plough. Initially, this
strategy helped in increasing foodgrains
production. But agricultural production
stagnated during late 1950s. To overcome this
problem, Intensive Agricultural District
Programme (IADP) and Intensive Agricultural
Area Programme (IAAP) were launched. But two
consecutive droughts during mid-1960s
resulted in food crisis in the country.
Consequently, the foodgrains were imported
from other countries.
New seed varieties of wheat (Mexico) and
rice (Philippines) known as high yielding
varieties (HYVs) were available for cultivation
by mid-1960s. India took advantage of this and
introduced package technology comprising
HYVs, along with chemical fertilizers in irrigated
areas of Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat. Assured
supply of soil moisture through irrigation was
a basic pre-requisite for the success of this new
agricultural technology. This strategy of
agricultural development paid dividends
instantly and increased the foodgrains
production at very fast rate. This spurt of
agricultural growth came to be known as
‘Green Revolution’. This also gave fillip to the
development of a large number of agro-inputs,
agro-processing industries and small-scale
industries. This strategy of agricultural
development made the country self-reliant in
foodgrain production. But green revolution was
initially confined to irrigated areas only. This
led to regional disparities in agricultural
development in the country till the seventies,
after which the technology spread to the Eastern
and Central parts of the country.
The Planning Commission of India
focused its attention on the problems of
agriculture in rainfed areas in 1980s. It
initiated agro-climatic planning in 1988 to
induce regionally balanced agricultural
development in the country. It also emphasised
the need for diversification of agriculture and
harnessing of resources for development of
dairy farming, poultry, horticulture, livestock
rearing and aquaculture.
Initiation of the policy of liberalisation and
free market economy in 1990s is likely to
influence the course of development of Indian
agriculture. Lack of development of rural
infrastructure, withdrawal of subsidies and
price support, and impediments in availing of
the rural credits may lead to inter-regional and
inter-personal disparities in rural areas.
Growth of Agricultural Output and Technology
There has been a significant increase in
agricultural output and improvement in
technology during the last fifty years.
• Production and yield of many crops
such as rice and wheat has increased at
an impressive rate. Among the other
crops, the production of sugarcane,
oilseeds and cotton has also increased
appreciably. India ranked first in the
p r o d u c t i o n o f p u l s e s and j u t e in
2008-09. It is the second largest-
producer of rice, wheat, groundnut,
sugarcane and vegetables.
• Expansion of irrigation has played a very
crucial role in enhancing agricultural
output in the country. It provided basis
for introduction of modern agricultural
technology such as high yielding varieties
of seeds, chemical fertilizers, pesticides and
farm machinery. The net irrigated area in
the country has increased from 20.85 to
54.66 million ha over the period 1950-51
to 2000-01. Over these 50 years, area
irrigated more than once in an agricultural
year has increased from 1.71 to 20.46
million ha.
• Modern agricultural technology has
diffused very fast in various areas of the
country. Consumption of chemical
fertilizers has increased by 15 times since
mid-sixties. In 2001-02, per hectare
consumption of chemical fertilizers in India
was 91 kg which was equal to its average
consumption in the world (90 kg). But in
the irrigated areas of Punjab and Haryana,
Land Resources and Agriculture
55
2015-16the consumption of chemical fertilizers per
unit area is three to four times higher than
that of the national average. Since the high
yielding varieties are highly susceptible to
pests and diseases, the use of pesticides
has increased significantly since 1960s.
Low productivity
The yield of the crops in the country is low in
comparison to the international level. Per
hectare output of most of the crops such as
rice, wheat, cotton and oilseeds in India is
much lower than that of U.S.A., Russia and
Japan. Because of the very high pressure on
the land resources, the labour productivity
in Indian agriculture is also very low in
comparison to international level. The vast
rainfed areas of the country, particularly
drylands which mostly grow coarse cereals,
pulses and oilseeds have very low yields.
Why is agricultural productivity low in dry
regions?
Fig. 5.12 : Roto Till Drill - A modern agricultural equipment
Pr
ob
lems of Indian Ag
ricultur
e
Pro
blems
Agricultur
riculture
The nature of problems faced by Indian
agriculture varies according to agro-ecological
and historical experiences of its different regions.
Hence, most of the agricultural problems in the
country are region specific. Yet, there are some
problems which are common and range from
physical constraints to institutional hindrances.
A detailed discussion on these problems follows:
Constraints of Financial Resources and
Indebtedness
The inputs of modern agriculture are very
expensive. This resource intensive approach has
become unmanageable for marginal and small
farmers as they have very meagre or no saving
to invest in agriculture. To tide over these
difficulties, most of such farmers have resorted
to availing credit from various institutions and
money lenders. Crop failures and low returns
from agriculture have forced them to fall in the
trap of indebtedness.
Dependence on Erratic Monsoon
Irrigation covers only about 33 per cent of the
cultivated area in India. The crop production
in rest of the cultivated land directly depends
on rainfall. Poor performance of south-west
Monsoon also adversely affects the supply of
canal water for irrigation. On the other hand,
the rainfall in Rajasthan and other drought
prone areas is too meagre and highly unreliable.
Even the areas receiving high annual rainfall
experience considerable fluctuations. This
makes them vulnerable to both droughts and
floods. Drought is a common phenomenon in
the low rainfall areas which may also experience
occasional floods. The flash floods in drylands
of Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Rajasthan in
2006 are examples of this phenomenon.
Droughts and floods continue to be twin menace
in Indian agriculture.
56
What are the implications of severe
indebtedness? Do you feel that the recent
incidents of farmers’ suicides in different
states of the country are the result of
indebtedness?
Lack of Land Reforms
Indian peasantry had been exploited for a
long time as there had been unequal
distribution of land. Among the three
revenue systems operational during British
period i.e. Mahalwari, Ryotwari and
Zamindari, the last one was most exploitative
for the peasants. After independence, land
reforms were accorded priority, but these
India : People and Economy
2015-16reforms were not implemented effectively due
to lack of strong political will. Most of the state
governments avoided taking politically tough
decisions which went against strong political
lobbies of landlords. Lack of implementation
of land reforms has resulted in continuation
of inequitous distribution of cultivable land
which is detrimental to agricultural
development.
Small Farm Size and Fragmentation of
Landholdings
There are a large number of marginal and small
farmers in the country. More than 60 per cent
of the ownership holdings have a size smaller
than one (ha). Furthermore, about 40 per cent
of the farmers have operational holding size
smaller than 0.5 hectare (ha). The average size
of land holding is shrinking further under
increasing population pressure. Furthermore,
in India, the land holdings are mostly
fragmented. There are some states where
consolidation of holding has not been carried
out even once. Even the states where it has been
carried out once, second consolidation is
required as land holdings have fragmented
again in the process of division of land among
the owners of next generations. The small size
fragmented landholdings are uneconomic.
Lack of Commercialisation
A large number of farmers produce crops for
self-consumption. These farmers do not have
enough land resources to produce more than
their requirement. Most of the small and
marginal farmers grow foodgrains, which are
What changes have you noticed in
agricultural sector and cropping
pattern? Discuss in the class.
Land Resources and Agriculture
57
2015-16meant for their own family consumption.
Modernisation and commercialisation of
agriculture have however, taken place in the
irrigated areas.
Vast Under-employment
There is a massive under-employment in the
agricultural sector in India, particularly in the
un-irrigated tracts. In these areas, there is a
seasonal unemployment ranging from 4 to 8
months. Even in the cropping season work is
not available throughout, as agricultural
operations are not labour intensive. Hence, the
people engaged in agriculture do not have the
opportunity to work round the year.
Degradation of Cultivable Land
One of the serious problems that arises out of
faulty strategy of irrigation and agricultural
development is degradation of land resources.
This is serious because it may lead to
depletion of soil fertility. The situation is
particularly alarming in irrigated areas. A large
tract of agricultural land has lost its fertility
due to alkalisation and salinisation of soils and
waterlogging. Alkalinity and salinity have
already affected about 8 million ha land.
Another 7 million ha land in the country has
lost its fertility due to waterlogging. Excessive
use of chemicals such as insecticides and
pesticides has led to their concentration in toxic
amounts in the soil profile. Leguminous crops
have been displaced from the cropping pattern
in the irrigated areas and duration of fallow
has substantially reduced owing to multiple
cropping. This has obliterated the process of
natural fertilization such as nitrogen fixation.
Rainfed areas in humid and semi-arid tropics
also experience degradation of several types
like soil erosion by water and wind erosion
which are often induced by human activities.
Prepare a list of agricultural problems in your own
region. How similar or different are these problems
compared to the problems mentioned in this chapter?
EXERCISES
1.
Choose the right answers of the following from the given options.
(i)
Which one of the following is NOT a land-use category?
(a) Fallow land
(c)
Net Area Sown
(ii)
(b) Marginal land
(d) Culturable Wasteland
What one of the following is the main reason due to which share of forest
has shown an increase in the last forty years?
(a) Extensive and efficient efforts of afforestation
(b) Increase in community forest land
(c)
(d)
(iii)
Which one of the following is the main form of degradation in irrigated
areas?
(a) Gully erosion
(c)
Salinisation of soils
(b)
58
Increase in notified area allocated for forest growth
Better peoples’ participation in managing forest area.
Wind erosion
(d)
Siltation of land
India : People and Economy
2015-162.
(iv) Which one of the following crops is not cultivated under dryland farming?
(a) Ragi
(c) Groundnut
(b) Jowar
(d) Sugarcane
(v) In which of the following group of countries of the world, HYVs of wheat
and rice were developed?
(a) Japan and Australia
(c) Mexico and Philippines
(b) U.S.A. and Japan
(d) Mexico and Singapore
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
3.
Differentiate between barren and wasteland and culturable wasteland.
How would you distinguish between net sown area and gross cropped
area?
Why is the strategy of increasing cropping intensity important in a
country like India?
How do you measure total cultivable land?
What is the difference between dryland and wetland farming?
Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)
What are the different types of environmental problems of land resources
in India?
(ii)
What are the important strategies for agricultural development followed
in the post-independence period in India?
Land Resources and Agriculture
59
2015-16
