CONTENTS Foreword --- iii Letter to the Readers --- v Chapter 1 Challenges of Nation Building 2 Chapter 2 Era of One party Dominance 26 Chapter 3 Politics of Planned Development 46 Chapter 4 India’s External Relations 64 Chapter 5 Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 82 Chapter 6 The Crisis of Democratic Order 102 Chapter 7 Rise of Popular Movements 128 Chapter 8 Regional Aspirations 148 Chapter 9 Recent Developments in Indian Politics 172In this chapter...
Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru speaking from the Red Fort, 15 August 1947Politics in India since Independence 4 “ Three Challenges Tomorrow we shall be free from the slavery of the British domination.
This was the problem of ‘minorities’ on bothChallenges of Nation Building 9 sides of the border.
Even after large scale migration of Muslims to the newly created Pakistan, the Muslim population in India accounted for 12 per cent of the total population in 1951.
But most leaders of the national movement believed that India must treat persons of all religions 11 Challenges of Nation Building G ARAM H AWA Salim Mirza, a shoe manufacturer in Agra, increasingly finds himself a stranger amid the people he has lived with all his life.
The NizamChallenges of Nation Building 15 Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Isn’t it better that we now learn to live and respect each other as independent nations?16 “ Politics in India since Independence of Hyderabad made a similar announcement the next day.
For instance, there were 26 small states in today’s Orissa.
Saurashtra region of Gujarat had 14 big states, 119 small states and numerous other different administrations.
This led to the creation of 14 states and six union territories.
Potti Sriramulu (1901-1952): Gandhian worker; left government job to participate in Salt Satyagraha; also participated in individual Satyagraha; went on a fast in 1946 demanding that temples in Madras province be opened to dalits; undertook a fast unto death from 19 October 1952 demanding separate state of Andhra Pradesh; died during the fast on 15 December 1952.Politics in India since Independence 22 “Coaxing the Genie back” (Published in 1956) asked if the State Reorganisation Commission could contain the genie of linguism.
The US has one-fourth of our population but 51 states.
Why can’t India have more than 100 states?Politics in India since Independence 24 1.
At that time there were 17 crore eligible voters, who had to elect about 3,200 MLAs and 489 Members of Lok Sabha.
Only 15 per cent of these eligible voters were literate.
The Election Commission trained over 3 lakh officers and polling staff to conduct the elections.
The party won 364 of the 489 seats in the first Lok Sabha and finished way ahead of any other challenger.
The Communist Party of India that came next in terms of seats won only 16 seats.
3132 Politics in India since Independence Sabha elections.
In 1952, for example, the Congress obtained 45 per cent of the total votes.
But it managed to win 74 per cent of the seats.
The party won 60 of the 126 seats and had the support of five independents.
In the first general election, CPI won 16 seats and emerged as the largest opposition party.
A.K. Gopalan (1904-1977): Communist leader from Kerala, worked as a Congress worker initially; joined the Communist Party in 1939; after the split in the Communist Party in 1964, joined the CPI (M) and worked for strengthening the party; respected as a parliamentarian; Member of Parliament from 1952.38 Politics in India since Independence S IMHASAN Some of these, like the Congress Socialist Party, later separated from the Congress and became opposition parties.
since 1942; founder In the 1950s Jana Sangh remained on the margins member of the of the electoral politics and was able to secure only 3 Bharatiya Jana Lok Sabha seats in 1952 elections and 4 seats in 1957 Sangh; General general elections to Lok Sabha.
• Why was this development strategy abandoned in later years?politics of planned development 3 As the global demand for steel increases, Orissa, which has one of the largest reserves of untapped iron ore in the country, is being seen as an important investment destination.
51Politics in India since Independence 52 The draft of the First Five Year Plan and then the actual Plan Document, released in December 1951, generated a lot of excitement LQ WKH FRXQWU\ 3HRSOH IURP DOO ZDONV RI OLIH ă DFDGHPLFV MRXUQDOLVWV government and private sector employees, industrialists, farmers, SROLWLFLDQV HWF ă GLVFXVVHG DQG GHEDWHG WKH GRFXPHQWV H[WHQVLYHO\ The excitement with planning reached its peak with the launching of the Second Five Year Plan in 1956 and continued somewhat till the Third Five Year Plan in 1961.
The First Five Year Plan addressed, mainly, the agrarian sector including investment in dams and irrigation.Politics of Planned Development 53 Agricultural sector was hit hardest by Partition and needed urgent attention.
The failure was not that of policy but its non-implementation, because the landowning classes 55 Politics of Planned Development P ATHER P ANCHALI This film tells the story of a poor family in a Bengal village and its struggle to survive.
5758 Politics in India since Independence Government Campaign reaches the village “In a way the advertisement stuck or written on walls gave an accurate introduction to the villager’s problems and how to solve them.
The food shortage was significant in all districts of Bihar, with 9 districts producing less than half of their normal output.
Between 1950 and 1980 the Indian economy grew at a sluggish per annum rate of 3 to 3.5%.
(a) Charan Singh (b) P C Mahalanobis (c) Bihar Famine (d) Verghese Kurien 63 i. ii.
9. “Indian policy makers made a mistake by emphasising the role of state in the economy.
external relations 4 International context “ As a nation born in the backdrop of the world war, India decided to conduct its foreign relations with an aim to respect the sovereignty of all other nations and to achieve security through the maintenance of peace.
The same period also witnessed developments like the establishment of the UN, the creation of nuclear weapons, the emergence of CommunistIndia’s external relations 67 China, and the beginning of decolonisation.
Indian and Chinese leaders visited each other’s country and were greeted by large and friendly crowds.India’s external relations 69 TIBET The plateau of the central Asian region called Tibe is one of the major issues that historically caused tension between India and China.
constructio V.K. Krishna Menon (1897-1974): Diplomat and minister; active in the Labour Party in UK between 1934- 1947; Indian High Commissioner in UK and later head of India’s delegation to UN; Rajya Sabha MP and later Lok Sabha MP; member of the Union Cabinet from 1956; Defence Minsiter since 1957; considered very close to Nehru; resigned after the India-China war in 1962.72 Politics in India since Independence The Chinese invasion, 1962 “ “ Frankly ...my impression (of Zhou Enlai) was very favourable.
73 India’s external relations H AQEEQAT A small platoon of Indian army is rescued by the gypsies in Ladakh region.
197178 Politics in India since Independence further after the 1971 war.
When Communist China conducted nuclear tests in October 1964, the five nuclear weapon powers, the 86 8665 8. )UDQFH DQG &KLQD 7DLZDQ WKHQ UHSUHVHQWHG &KLQD ă DOVR WKH ILYH 3HUPDQHQW 0HPEHUV RI WKH 81 6HFXULW\ &RXQFLO ă WULHG WR impose the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 on the rest of the world.
7980 Politics in India since Independence 1. Write ‘true’ or ‘false’ against each of these statements.
4. “The conduct of foreign affairs is an outcome of a two-way interaction between domestic compulsions and prevailing international climate”.
• understand how the political transition took place after Nehru; • describe how the opposition unity and the Congress split posed a challenge to Congress dominance; • explain how a new Congress led by Indira Gandhi overcame these challenges; and • analyse how new policies and ideologies facilitated the restoration of the Congress system.challenges to and restoration of the congress system 5 Challenge of Political Succession Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru passed away in May 1964.
Opposition parties were in the forefront of organising public protests and pressurising the 87 Election in a Rajasthan Village This is a story about 1967 assembly elections.
a anohar ohia (191 -19 7): Socialist leader and thinker; freedom fighter and among the founders of the Congress Socialist Party; after the split in the parent party, the leader of the Socialist Party and later the Samyukta Socialist Party; Member, Lok Sabha, 1963- 67; founder editor of Mankind and Jan, known for original contribution to a non-European socialist theory; as political leader, best known for sharp attacks on Nehru, strategy of non-Congressism, advocacy of reservation for backward castes and opposition to English.
C. atara an nna urai (19 9-19 9): Chief Minister of Madras (Tamil Nadu) from 1967; a journalist, popular writer and orator; initially associated with the Justice Party in Madras province; later joined Dravid Kazagham (1934); formed DMK as a political party in 1949; a proponent of Dravid culture, he was opposed to imposition of Hindi and led the anti-Hindi agitations; supporter of greater autonomy to States.
8990 Politics in India since Independence The dramatic nature of the political change would be more apparent to you at the State level.
The SVD government in Bihar, for LQVWDQFH LQFOXGHG WKH WZR VRFLDOLVW SDUWLHV ă 663 DQG WKH 363 ă DORQJ with the CPI on the left and Jana Sangh on the right.
In Punjab it was called the ‘Popular United Front’ and comprised the two rival $NDOL SDUWLHV DW WKDW WLPH ă 6DQW JURXS DQG WKH 0DVWHU JURXS ă ZLWK ERWK WKH FRPPXQLVW SDUWLHV ă WKH &3, DQG WKH &3,0 WKH 663 WKH Republican Party and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
A cartoonist’s reading of Charan Singh’s attempt to build a United Front of non-communist parties in 1974Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 91 Defection Another important feature of the politics after the 1967 election was the role played by defections in the making and unmaking of governments in the States.
i alin appa (19 - ): Senior Congress leader; Member of Constituent Assembly; member of Lok Sabha; Chief Minister of the then Mysore (Karnataka) State; regarded as the maker of modern Karnataka; President of Congress during 1968-71.
93 “The Left Hook” was published after the victory of V.V. Giri, (the boxer with the garland) over the nominee of the Sydicate, represented here by Nijalingappa (on his knees).94
9596 Politics in India since Independence The 1971 Election and Restoration of Congress The split in the Congress reduced Indira Gandhi Government to a minority.
The combine won 375 seats in Lok Sabha and secured 48.4 per cent votes.
Indira Gandhi’s Congress(R) won 352 seats with about 44 per cent of the popular votes on its own.
Contrast this with the performance of the Congress(O): the party with so many stalwarts could get less than one-fourth of the votes secured by Indira Gandhi’s party and win merely 16 seats.
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 99 Z ANJEER Vijay, a young police officer is framed in false charges and sent to jail while fighting gangsters.
Prices increased by 23 per cent in 1973 and 30 per cent in 1974.
Food grain output declined by 8 per cent.
Both the Gujarat and BiharThe Crisis of Democratic Order 107 agitations were seen as anti-Congress and rather than opposing the State governments, they were seen as protests against the leadership of Indira Gandhi.
What a pity!108 Politics in India since Independence decision in 1973 in the Kesavananda Bharati case, a vacancy arose for the post of the Chief Justice of India.
Should the President have declared Emergency without any recommendation from the Cabinet?110111112 Politics in India since Independence Consequences This brought the agitation to an abrupt stop; strikes were banned; many opposition leaders were put in jail; the political situation became very quiet though tense.
In the background of the ruling of the Allahabad HighThe Crisis of Democratic Order 113 Court in the Indira Gandhi case, an amendment was made declaring that elections of Prime Minister, President and Vice-President could not be challenged in the Court.
116 Critics of Emergency point out that most of these promises by the government remained unfulfilled, that these were simply meant to divert attention from the excesses that were taking place.
In all, 676 opposition leaders were arrested.
Now they came together on theThe Crisis of Democratic Order 119 eve of the elections and formed a new party, known as the Janata Party.
The Congress could win only 154 seats in the Lok Sabha.
Politics in India since Independence its allies won 330 out of the 542 seats in the Lok Sabha; Janata Party itself won 295 seats and thus enjoyed a clear majority.
It won 353 seats and came back to power.
Again, the northern States elected non-Congress governments in which the leaders of the backward castes played a i an a (19 8-198 ): Freedom fighter and Congress leader from Bihar; Deputy Prime Minister of India (1977-79); member of Constituent Assembly; also a Member of Parliament since 1952 till his death; Labour Minister in the first ministry of free India; held various other ministries from 1952 to 1977; a scholar and astute administrator.Politics in India since Independence 124 This cartoon appeared after the election results of 1980.
• what role do they play in a democratic set up like ours?rise of popular movements 7 Nature of popular movements Take a look at the opening image of this chapter.
131 Rise of Popular Movements132 a Politics in India since Independence eo hasal Turning their backs to the sun, they journeyed through centuries.
And yet, social discrimination and violence against theRise of Popular Movements 133 ex-untouchable groups continued in various ways.
Characteristics 135 I have never met anyone who says he wishes to be a farmer.
The arrack auctions in Nellore district were postponed 17 times.
139 Rise of Popular Movements Women’s demonstration in favour of anti-dowry act.
The project consisted of 30 big dams, 135 medium sized and around 3,000 small dams to be constructed on the Narmada and its tributaries that flow across three states of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
In the process of construction of the dam 245 villages from these States were expected to get submerged.
It was around 1988-89 that the LVVXHV FU\VWDOOLVHG XQGHU WKH EDQQHU RI WKH 1%$ ă D ORRVH FROOHFWLYH RI local voluntary organisations.
ThatRise of Popular Movements 143 Popular movements have produced a wide range of litrature, often in the form of small magazines.
145 Rise of Popular Movements is perhaps why these groups turned to mass actions and mobilisations outside the electoral arena.
...... .... .......a large part of the space occupied by the newRise of Popular Movements 147 social movements seem to be suffering from .. various characteristics which have prevented them from being relevant to the truly oppressed and the poor in the form of a solid unified movement of the people.
Or may be, not dangerous at all?150 Politics in India since Independence and aspirations.
The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding of India’s future.Regional Aspirations 151 Jammu and Kashmir You may have heard about the violence in Jammu and Kashmir (J&K).
Tamil tion in a it g a indi Anti-H Nadu, 1965153 ng Tamil cultural history ater importance in hool curricula.
Initially seen as a threat to Indian nationalism, regional politics in Tamil Nadu is a good example o the compatibility of regionalism an nationalism.Politics in India since Independence 154 hei h Moha a ullah (19 -198 ): Leader of Jammu and Kashmir; proponent of autonomy and secularism for Jammu and Kashmir; led the popular struggle against princely rule; opposed to Pakistan due to its non-secular character; leader of the National Conference; Prime Minister of J K immediately after its accession with India in 1947; dismissed and jailed by Government of India from 1953 to 1964 and again from 1965 to 1968; became Chief Minister of the State after an agreement with Indira Gandhi in 1974.
Article 370 gives greater autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir compared to other States of India.
There is a section of people outside of J&K that believes that the special status of the State conferred by Article 370 does not allow full integration of the State with India.
155 Regional Aspirations R OJA Tamil film depicting the travails of Roja, a newly wed and doting wife when her husband, Rishi, is abducted by militants.
Punjab Master Tara in h (188 -19 7): Prominent Sikh religious and political leader; one of the early leaders of the Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee (SGPC); leader of the Akali movement; supporter of the freedom movement but opposed to Congress’ policy of negotiating only with the Muslims; after Independence, he was the senior most advocate of formation of separate Punjab State.
160 painting ing at a wall n.
Women look assassinatio i’s dh dira Gan depicting InRegional Aspirations 161 Road to peace After coming to power following the election in 1984, the new Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi initiated a dialogue with moderate Akali leaders.
When elections were held in Punjab in 1992, only 24 per cent of the electors tuned out to vote.
The region has only 4 per cent of the country’s population but about twice as much share of its area.
163 My friend Chon said that people in Delhi know more about the map of Europe than about the North-East in our country.
re is a e gions.. h e r , s r u w e fo n e e h h t t To end orists in i, Mizoram s of ter lh activitie arjeeling, De D , b ja n PuRegional Aspirations i i s 167 er er At the time of Independence, Sikkim was a ‘protectorate’ of India.
Ka i hen up or i Khan sarpa (19 4): Leader of democracy movement in Sikkim; founder of Sikkim Praja Mandal and later leader of the Sikkim State Congress; in 1962 founded the Sikkim National Congress; after an electoral victory, he led the movement for integration of Sikkim with India; after the integration, Sikkim Congress merged with the Indian National Congress.
developments in indian politics 9 Context of the 1990s You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi.
The party that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984 was reduced to only 197 in this election.
Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in the initial phase of the ‘New Economic Policy’.Recent Developments in Indian Politics 175 F ourth, a number of events culminated in the demolition of the disputed structure at Ayodhya (known as Babri Masjid) in December 1992.
It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other single party to fill in its place.Recent Developments in Indian Politics 177 Talk to your parents about their memories of the 1990s.
This gave rise to the term ‘Congress system’.Recent Developments in Indian Politics 179180 Politics in India since Independence We also saw in Chapter Five that, especially since the late 1960s, various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming separate political parties of their own.
It therefore recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in educational institutions and government jobs for these groups.
But now the policy of reservation for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country.Recent Developments in Indian Politics 183 Political fallouts The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the Dalits.
It took a strong SRVLWLRQ LQ IDYRXU RI SROLWLFDO SRZHU WR WKH μEDKXMDQ¶ ă WKH 6& 67 OBC and minorities.
Or will it remain just a political game? Kanshi a (19 4- ): Proponent of Bahujan empowerment and founder of Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP); left his central government job for social and political work; founder of BAMCEF, DS-4 and finally the BSP in 1984; astute political strategist, he regarded political power as master key to attaining social equality; credited with Dalit resurgence in north Indian States.184
185186 wise): (Clock neer Credit eer, The Pio n io .
India’s democratic politics is based on the premise that all religious communities enjoy the freedom that they may join any party and that there will not beRecent Developments in Indian Politics 187 community-based political parties.
As in the case of anti-Sikh riots of 1984,188 Politics in India since Independence “ On 27 February1947, at the very first meeting of the Advisory Committee of the Constituent Assembly on Fundamental Rights, Minorities and Tribals and Excluded Areas, Sardar Patel asserted: “It is for us to prove that it is a bogus claim, a false claim, and that nobody can be more interested than us, in India, in the protectio of our minorities.
Is there no way we can make all this a matter of past?Recent Developments in Indian Politics 189 “ Gujarat riots show that the governmental machinery also becomes susceptible to sectarian passions.
Ć <RX ZLOO QRWLFH WKDW %-3 DQG &RQJUHVV ZHUH HQJDJHG LQ D WRXJK competition in this period.
191192 Politics in India since Independence T hird, acceptance of the role of State level parties in governance RI WKH FRXQWU\ ă WKH GLVWLQFWLRQ EHWZHHQ 6WDWH OHYHO DQG QDWLRQDO level parties is fast becoming less important.
2000: Will India survive?
All we know is that democratic politics is here to stay in India and that it will unfold through a continuous churning of some of the factors mentioned in this chapter.Recent Developments in Indian Politics 193 2. Match the following.
What different configurations of political parties these differences lead to? 4. “In the new era of coalition politics, political parties are not aligning or re- aligning on the basis of ideology.”
